
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, Chapter 1, Section A - Description and General Information on Duty to Notify and Duty to Assist
Article ID: 554400000181474
Updated Feb 04, 2025

  Next Section -->
Overview 

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Description of Public Law (PL) 106-475, Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000, and its Impact on 38 U.S.C. 5102, 5103, and 5103A
2
Description of PL 112-154, Honoring America's Veterans and Caring for Camp Lejeune Families Act of 2012, and its Impact on 38 U.S.C. 5103 and 5103A
3
PL 115-55, Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017, and its Impact on 38 U.S.C. 5103 and 5103A
4
Definitions Related to Duty to Notify and Duty to Assist
 

 
1.  Description of PL 106-475, Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000, and its Impact on 38 U.S.C. 5102, 5103, and 5103A
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about PL 106-475 and its impact on 38 U.S.C. 5102, 5103, and 5103A, including
description of PL 106-475, and 
amendment to 
38 U.S.C. 5102
38 U.S.C. 5103, and 
38 U.S.C. 5103A. 

Change Date

June 29, 2015

I.i.1.A.1.a.  Description of PL 106-475

Public Law (PL) 106-475, Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000, was enacted on November 9, 2000, and
redefined the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) duty to assist claimants in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate a claim 
eliminated the requirement from Morton v. West, 12 Vet.App. 477 (1999), that a claimant must submit a well-grounded claim before VA can assist in developing the claim, and 
mandated specific notice requirements regarding information that is necessary to substantiate a claim. 
The impact on VA’s duty to notify and duty to assist claimants is discussed in this chapter.
 
References:  For more information on VA's
duty to notify under 38 U.S.C. 5103, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B
duty to assist with obtaining records, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C, and
duty to assist with providing a medical examination or opinion, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A and B, and
regulation on the duty to notify and duty to assist, see 38 CFR 3.159. 

I.i.1.A.1.b.  Amendment to 38 U.S.C. 5102

PL 106-475 amended 38 U.S.C. 5102 to require VA, upon a receipt of an incomplete application for benefits or an intent to claim or apply for a benefit, to
notify the claimant of the information necessary to complete the application, and 
to defer assistance until the claimant submits the information.  
Note:  This includes furnishing the applicant any instructions and forms necessary to apply for that benefit.
 
References:  For more information on 
screening applications for substantial completeness, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.1
notification requirements for an incomplete application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b and c
notification requirements for a request for application or an intent to file a claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.e, and 
prescribed forms to furnish claimants, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a. 

I.i.1.A.1.c.  Amendment to 38 U.S.C. 5103

PL 106-475 amended 38 U.S.C. 5103  to require VA to notify the claimant of any information not previously provided that is necessary to substantiate the claim.  The PL provided that such information shall be received by VA within one year from the date of the notification.
 
Note:  VA has traditionally referred to the required notice in 38 U.S.C. 5103 as a VCAA Notice.  However, because of amendments to the law since the Veterans Claims Assistance Act (VCAA) of 2000, the term Section 5103 notice has now replaced VCAA Notice and such term will be used throughout the manual. 
 
Reference:  For more information on VA's duty to notify under 38 U.S.C. 5103, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B, and 
38 CFR 3.159(b)(1). 

I.i.1.A.1.d.  Amendment to 38 U.S.C. 5103A

PL 106-475 amended 38 U.S.C. 5103A to require VA to make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate a claim.  This assistance includes obtaining relevant Federal records, relevant private records adequately identified by the claimant, and a medical examination, if necessary to decide the claim. 
 
Reference:  For more information on VA's duty to assist claimants in obtaining evidence, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C, and 
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A and B, and 
38 CFR 3.159(c). 

2.  PL 112-154, Honoring America’s Veterans and Caring for Camp Lejeune Families Act of 2012, and its Impact on 38 U.S.C. 5103 and 5103A
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about PL 112-154 and its impact on 38 U.S.C. 5103 and 5103A, including
PL 112-154, Section 504, authorization of use of electronic communication to provide notice to claimants for benefits, and 
PL 112-154, Section 505, duty to assist claimants in obtaining private records. 

Change Date

June 29, 2015

I.i.1.A.2.a.  PL 112-154, Section 504, Authorization of Use of Electronic Communication to Provide Notice to Claimants for Benefits

PL 112-154, Honoring America’s Veterans and Caring for Camp Lejeune Families Act of 2012, Section 504, amended 38 U.S.C. 5103 to streamline VA’s duty to notify responsibilities.
 
These statutory changes, among other things, permit VA to
provide Section 5103 notices by the most effective means available, including electronic communications
provide Section 5103 notices before, rather than after, the submission of a claim such as attaching the notice to an application 
eliminate the need to provide additional Section 5103 notices on subsequent claims if the same type of Section 5103 notice has already been provided on a current pending claim within the previous year, and
utilize e-mails as a way to transmit Section 5103 notices; however, this is currently not a viable option due to privacy and security concerns.
Important:  Although PL 112-154 indicates that VA’s duty to notify responsibilities no longer apply when VA can award the maximum benefit based on the evidence of record, VA will refrain from implementing procedures in the manual on this issue until a substantive rule-making is implemented through VA regulation in 38 CFR 3.159.
 
Reference:  For specific guidance on VA’s duty to notify, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B, and
38 CFR 3.159(b).

I.i.1.A.2.b.  PL 112-154, Section 505, Duty to Assist Claimants in Obtaining Private Records

PL 112-154, Section 505, amended 38 U.S.C. 5103A to streamline VA’s duty to assist responsibilities.
 
These statutory changes, among other things, permit VA to
make no less than two requests to a custodian of a private record (which was consistent with VA procedures prior to enactment of PL 112-154), and
encourage claimants under VA regulations to submit relevant private medical records if such submission does not burden the claimant. 
Important:  Although PL 112-154 indicates that VA’s duty to assist responsibilities no longer apply when VA can award the maximum benefit based on the evidence of record, VA will refrain from implementing procedures in the manual on this issue until a substantive rule-making is implemented through VA regulation in 38 CFR 3.159.    
 
Reference:  For more information on VA’s duty to assist claimants in obtaining private records, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C.2, and 
38 CFR 3.159(c)(1). 

 
3.  PL 115-55, Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017, and its Impact on 38 U.S.C. 5103 and 5103A 

Introduction

This topic contains information about PL 115-55 and its impact on 38 U.S.C. 5103 and 38 U.S.C. 5103A, including 
impact of PL 115-55, and
PL 115-55 and
duty to notify
applicability of duty to assist
duty to assist errors, and
duty to provide decision notice. 

Change Date

February 19, 2019

I.i.1.A.3.a.  Impact of PL 115-55 

On February 19, 2019, changes went into effect based on PL 115-55, Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017.
 
The PL and associated regulatory changes impacted both VA’s duty to assist and duty to notify requirements.

I.i.1.A.3.b.  PL 115-55 and Duty to Notify 

PL 115-55 revised Section 5103 to state that the notice requirement for a substantially complete claim applies to initial and supplemental claims; however, VA is not required to provide that notice with respect to a supplemental claim filed within one year of an agency of original jurisdiction or Board decision on an issue. 

I.i.1.A.3.c.  PL 115-55 and Applicability of Duty to Assist 

VA’s duty to assist in the gathering of evidence begins upon receipt of a substantially complete application for an initial or supplemental claim and ends once VA issues a decision on the claim.  The definition of a substantially complete application in 38 CFR 3.159 has been amended to add the requirement that a supplemental claim application include or identify potentially new evidence.
 
Important:  The duty to assist does not apply to higher-level reviews (HLRs).
 
Reference:  For more information on processing HLRs, see M21-5, Chapter 5.

I.i.1.A.3.d.  PL 115-55 and Duty to Assist Errors

VA’s duty to assist is reinstated when a substantially complete initial claim or supplemental claim is filed or when a claim is returned to correct a “duty to assist” error in a prior decision.
 
Reference:  For more information on duty to assist errors, see M21-5, Chapter 5,5.

I.i.1.A.3.e.  PL 115-55 and Duty to Provide Decision Notice 

PL 115-55 required a change to 38 CFR 3.103(f).  Effective February 19, 2019, 38 CFR 3.103(f) requires VA’s written notification of decisions to include all of the following elements: 
identification of the issues adjudicated
a summary of the evidence considered
a summary of the applicable laws and regulations
identification of findings favorable to the claimant
in the case of a denial, identification of elements not satisfied leading to the denial
an explanation of how to obtain or access evidence used in making the decision
if applicable, identification of the criteria that must be satisfied to grant service connection (SC) or the next higher level of compensation, and
a summary of the applicable review options under 38 CFR 3.2500available for the claimant to seek further review of the decision.
Note:  These elements can be satisfied through a combination of the decision notice and its enclosures.
 
References:  For more information on
required notice elements in
rating decisions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A
notification letters, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.B, and
administrative decisions, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.C, and
favorable findings, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A.5.

  
4.  Definitions Related to Duty to Notify and Duty to Assist
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about definitions related to duty to notify and duty to assist, including
 
definition of relevant records
refraining from or discontinuing assistance
claims that are inherently incredible or lack merit, and
definition of 
competent medical evidence
competent lay evidence
substantially complete application
event
information
an initial claim
a supplemental claim, and 
reopened claim. 

Change Date

February 19, 2019

I.i.1.A.4.a.  Definition:  Relevant Records

For the purpose of VA statutory duty to notify/assist, relevant records must
relate to the disability or injury, or pension or Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) claim for which the claimant is seeking benefits, and
have a reasonable possibility of helping to substantiate the claim. 
VA is not required to assist a claimant in obtaining identified records if no reasonable possibility exists that such assistance would aid in substantiating the claim.
 
Reference:  For more information about relevant records, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.E, and
Golz v. Shinseki,  590 F.3d 1317, 1320-21 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

I.i.1.A.4.b.  Refraining From or Discontinuing Assistance

VA will refrain from or discontinue providing assistance in obtaining evidence for a claim if the substantially complete application for benefits indicates that there is no reasonable possibility that any assistance VA would provide to the claimant would substantiate the claim.
 
Circumstances in which VA will refrain from or discontinue providing assistance in obtaining evidence include, but are not limited to
the claimant's ineligibility for the benefit sought because of lack of qualifying service, lack of Veteran status, or other lack of legal eligibility
claims that are inherently incredible or clearly lack merit, and
an application requesting a benefit to which the claimant is not entitled as a matter of law. 
References:  For more information on
circumstances where VA will refrain from or discontinue providing assistance, see 38 CFR 3.159(d)
determining Veteran status and eligibility for benefits, see M21-1, Part III, i.1, and
inherently incredible claims, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i,1.A.4.c.

I.i.1.A.4.c.  Claims That Are Inherently Incredible or Lack Merit

VA will not provide assistance in obtaining evidence if a claim is inherently incredible or clearly lacks merit, even when the application itself is substantially complete.
 
The development or rating activity has the authority to determine whether a claim is incredible or without merit.  For compensation claims, this may involve an allegation that a particular disability is secondary to one for which SC has already been established.
 
Important:  VA employees have broad authority to determine whether or not a claim is inherently incredible or clearly lacks merit.  However, before deciding such a claim, VA may request that the claimant submit evidence to render the claim plausible or credible.
 
Examples:
A claimant alleges her service-connected tinnitus caused her hammertoes, but she furnishes no medical evidence to support this allegation.
A Veteran claims he developed posttraumatic stress disorder as a result of combat service in the Republic of Vietnam, but military records clearly show he had no foreign or combat service. 
References:  For more information on
claims that are inherently incredible or lack merit, see 38 CFR 3.159(d), and
notification requirements for claims that are inherently incredible or lack merit, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.f.

I.i.1.A.4.d.  Definition:  Competent Medical Evidence

Competent medical evidence means evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions.  Competent medical evidence may also mean statements conveying sound medical principles found in medical treatises. It would also include statements contained in authoritative writings such as medical and scientific articles and research reports or analyses.
 
Reference:  The definition of competent medical evidence for the purpose of this chapter is set forth in 38 CFR 3.159(a)(1).

I.i.1.A.4.e.  Definition:  Competent Lay Evidence

Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.
 
Note:  When evaluating lay evidence,
accept it at face value unless there is reason to question it, and
when conflicting evidence exists, weigh all the evidence as appropriate. 
Reference:  The definition of competent lay evidence for the purpose of this chapter is set forth in 38 CFR 3.159(a)(2).

I.i.1.A.4.f.  Definition:  Substantially Complete Application

Substantially complete application means an application containing
the claimant's name
the claimant’s relationship to the Veteran, if applicable
sufficient service information for VA to verify the claimed service, if applicable
the benefit sought and any medical condition(s) on which it is based
the claimant's signature
a statement of income in claims for Veterans Pension or Survivors Pension and Parents' DIC
identification or inclusion of potentially new evidence in supplemental claims, and
for HLRs, identification of the date of the decision for which review is sought. 
References:  For more information on   
the criteria for substantially complete applications, see
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3), and 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.1, and
signature requirements, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.2.

I.i.1.A.4.g.  Definition:  Event

Event means one or more incidents associated with places, types, and circumstances of service giving rise to disability.
 
Reference:  The definition of event for the purpose of this chapter is set forth in 38 CFR 3.159(a)(4).

I.i.1.A.4.h.  Definition:  Information

Information means non-evidentiary facts, such as the claimant's Social Security number or address; the name and military unit of a person who served with the Veteran; or the name and address of a medical care provider who may have evidence pertinent to the claim.
 
Reference:  The definition of information for the purpose of this chapter is set forth in 38 CFR 3.159(a)(5).

I.i.1.A.4.i.  Definition:  Initial Claim

An initial claim is a substantially complete claim for a benefit, other than a supplemental claim, on an application form prescribed by the Secretary, including:
the first filing by a claimant (original claim), and
a subsequent claim filed by a claimant for
an increase in a disability evaluation
a new benefit, or
a new disability.
References:  For more information on
substantially complete claims, see
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3), and
M21-1 Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f
initial claims, see 38 CFR 3.1(p)(1), and
claims for increase, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.C.

I.i.1.A.4.j.  Definition:  Supplemental Claim

A supplemental claim is a substantially complete claim for a VA benefit on an application form prescribed by the Secretary where an initial or supplemental claim for the same or similar benefit on the same or similar basis was previously decided.
 
Note:  In order to be considered substantially complete, a claimant must submit or identify potentially new evidence with a supplemental claim. 
 
References:  For more information on
substantially complete claims, see
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3), and
M21-1 Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f, and
supplemental claims, see
38 CFR 3.2501, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.B.

I.i.1.A.4.k.  Definition:  Reopened Claim

The term reopened claim pertains to requests filed prior to February 19, 2019, for a benefit after the disallowance of an earlier claim for that benefit became final.  This includes a claim in which SC for the same disability is reclaimed under a different theory of entitlement.
 
Example:  A Veteran whose claim for direct SC for hypertension was denied in 2012 submits a February 1, 2019, claim for SC for hypertension on a secondary basis.  Consider the claim for secondary SC to be a reopened claim because the same disability, hypertension, was reclaimed under a different theory of entitlement.
 
Notes: 
Final means the claim is no longer active, and the appeal period has expired.
Reopened claims do not include claims for increased evaluations or ancillary benefits. 
References:  For more information on
revisions based on a supplemental claim, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A, and
claims reopened under a different theory of entitlement, see Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

  Next Section -->
To Top 


M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, Chapter 1, Section B - General Information on Due Process
Article ID: 554400000181468
Updated May 27, 2025

 <-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics:
Topic 
Topic Name
1
Due Process and Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Benefits
2
Types of Notification
  

 
1.  Due Process and VA Benefits
  

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about how due process, as stated in the U.S. Constitution, affects VA benefits, including
due process and the U.S. Constitution
due process and VA
entitlement to notification, and
definition of third party information.

Change Date
 
January 29, 2018

I.i.1.B.1.a. Due Process and the U.S. Constitution
 
The Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution ensures that citizens have the right of due process.
 
“No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law.”

I.i.1.B.1.b. Due Process and VA
 
Due process in the administration of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits informs the beneficiary of a proposed adverse action that could reduce or terminate benefits, and provides the beneficiary with the opportunity to
provide additional evidence to contest the action, and/or
hold a hearing before VA decision-makers.
In most instances, due process applies when VA proposes to reduce or terminate a benefit.  In a few situations, such as a character of discharge determination, due process applies before VA determines eligibility for benefits.
    
Exceptions:  Contemporaneous notice is allowed in lieu of a notice of proposed adverse action (due process) in specific situations as listed in M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.C.1, and 38 CFR 3.103(b)(3)
 
References:  For more information on
definitions of notice of proposed adverse action and contemporaneous notice, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.B.2.a, and
due process, see 38 CFR 3.103.

I.i.1.B.1.c.  Entitlement to Notification
 
The following parties are entitled to notification of any decision made by VA that affects the payment of benefits or the granting of relief
beneficiaries
fiduciaries of minor or incompetent beneficiaries, and
beneficiaries’ designated representatives.

I.i.1.B.1.d.Definition:  Third Party Information
 
Third party information is any information that is not received from the beneficiary or from the beneficiary’s fiduciary.  Written correspondence is considered third party when received without the beneficiary’s signature or the signature of the beneficiary’s fiduciary. 
The table below lists the types of third party informants and provides examples of the types of information they provide.
Third Party Informant
Examples
VA medical facilities
Admission notices and reports that may result in hospital rate adjustments.
Exception:  A formal written notice of death.
References:  For more information on
hospitalization adjustments, see 38 CFR 3.551, and
adjustment of allowance for aid and attendance, see 38 CFR 3.552.
Field examiners
Legal instrument examiner (LIE), and
Beneficiary’s survivors
Notices and reports.
Exceptions:
Notices and reports may be considered first party sources when accompanied by
documents provided by the beneficiary, such as copies of award letters or marital or dependency status certificates, or
a signed, written statement from the beneficiary.
A notice of proposed adverse action is not required when an LIE requests that a beneficiary’s award be suspended because of the fiduciary’s failure to furnish accounting activities.
Important:  Notices from field examiners may be considered first party notices when reported on a fully complete VA Form 27-0820, Report of General Information.
Reference:  For more information on completing a VA Form 27-0820, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.f.
Other possible sources
VA computer matches
letters from friends and relatives
reports from employers
reports from other government and private agencies
Social Security’s third party query system, or
Share computer application.
Note:  The third party information submitted on any forms, documents, or signed statements must, in and of itself, justify the adverse action.
Reference:  For more information on handling mail that could result in a reduction or termination of benefits, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.D.3.

 
2.  Types of Notification
  

Change Date
 
March 17, 2016

I.i.1.B.2.a.  Types of Notification Concerning Change in Benefits
 
Two types of notification are used to inform a beneficiary of a change in benefits.  They are
notice of proposed adverse action, which informs a beneficiary of a proposed reduction or termination of benefits, and
contemporaneous notice, which informs a beneficiary of a change in benefits that was implemented at the time the notice was sent. 
Use the table below to determine the type of notice that should be used when information is received that would result in a reduction or termination of a beneficiary’s award.
If the source of information is ...
Then use a ...
the beneficiary
contemporaneous notice to tell the beneficiary that the information submitted has affected entitlement and to what extent.
Exception:  All income verification matches (IVM) which identify a reduction or termination of benefits require a notice of proposed adverse action.
References:  For more information about
contemporaneous notices, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.C, and
IVM, see M21-1, Part XIV, 4.D.
a designated power of attorney (POA) submitting information originating from a beneficiary
contemporaneous notice to tell the beneficiary that the information submitted has affected entitlement and to what extent.
a designated POA submitting information not originating from a beneficiary
 
notice of proposed adverse action to tell the beneficiary of a proposed change, about the information received, and the effect it may have on their benefit.
Reference:  For more information on general duties of a POA, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.4.a.
a third party
Reference:  For more information on third party information, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.B.1.d.
notice of proposed adverse action to tell the beneficiary of a proposed change, about the information received, and the effect it may have on their benefit.
References:  For more information on
notices of proposed adverse action, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.A, and
sending a notice of proposed adverse action to a hospitalized Veteran, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.A.3.c.
Note:  When it is unclear whether information submitted by the POA originated from the beneficiary, the beneficiary may be contacted via telephone to verify the origin of the information.  If the claimant cannot be reached, process as information not originating from a beneficiary.
References:  For more information on
receiving information via telephone that would reduce or discontinue benefits, see
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.C.2.a, and
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1
providing notice of proposed adverse action, see
38 CFR 3.103(b)(2), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.A
providing contemporaneous notice, see
38 CFR 3.103(b)(3), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.C, and
handling notification from a beneficiary that will result in removal of a dependent, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.A.4.g.
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, Chapter 2, Section A - General Information on Power of Attorney (POA)
Article ID: 554400000181475
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Representation
2
Appointing a Representative
3
Representation of Incompetent Claimants
4
Extent of Authority and Duties of Representatives
5
Requests for Exclusive Contact
6 
Revoking and Terminating Representation
7 
Representation of Survivors After the Claimant’s Death


 
1.  VA Representation

Introduction 

This topic contains information on the distinction between VA representation and POA under State law, including
claimant’s right to representation
definition of VA representation, and
POA under State law does not create VA representation. 

Change Date

February 19, 2019

I.i.2.A.1.a.  Claimant’s Right to Representation

The Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) policy is that all claimants have the right to representation before the department in claims affecting the payment of benefits or relief.
 
Claimants before VA are provided representation by Veterans service organizations (VSOs), attorneys, agents, and other accredited individuals to ensure that such claimants have responsible, qualified representation to assist in the preparation, presentation, and prosecution of claims for Veterans’ benefits.
 
Claimants may appoint a single representative for all claims, or they may choose to appoint a different representative on a limited basis for a particular claim.
 
References:  For more information on
a claimant’s right to representation before VA, see 38 CFR 3.103(a)
the purpose of representation before VA, see 38 CFR 14.626, and
unlimited versus limited representation, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2.d.  

I.i.2.A.1.b.  Definition: VA Representation

VA representation means broadly that an individual has completed legal formalities to authorize a VSO, attorney, agent, or individual to perform functions on their behalf in business before VA. 
 
Note:  For the purpose of this section, the term “power of attorney” (POA) refers to VA representation, unless otherwise specified.
 
Reference:  For information on the distinction between VA representatives and individuals with POA authority under State law, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.1.c. 

I.i.2.A.1.c.  POA Under State Law Does Not Create VA Representation

The execution by a claimant of a POA under State law has no effect for the purposes of prosecuting a VA claim.  The individual with POA under State law is not authorized, based on the State appointment, to engage in VA representation.
 
To be recognized by VA, a claimant’s representative must be duly appointed under VA policies and procedures.
 
Reference:  For more information on appointing an accredited representative of a VSO, agent, non-licensed individual, or attorney representative, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2.

 
2.  Appointing a Representative

Introduction

This topic contains information on appointing a representative, including
requirements to represent claimants
definition of declaration of representation
declaration of representation requirements, and
unlimited versus limited representation.

Change Date

February 19, 2019

I.i.2.A.2.a.  Requirements to Represent Claimants

The table below describes the requirements for POA representatives to represent claimants. 
Type of Representation
Requirements
Accredited representative of a VSO, agent, or attorney
Must obtain recognition from VA’s Office of General Counsel (OGC) in order to represent claimants.  Refer any person or group wanting to represent claimants to OGC for accreditation.
References:  For more information on
requirements for accredited representatives of VSOs, agents, and attorneys to obtain recognition, see 38 CFR 14.629, and
a list of accredited representatives of VSOs, agents, and attorneys maintained by OGC, see OGC’s accreditation search page.
Non-licensed individual
May represent a claimant on a one-time, one claim basis per the provisions of 38 CFR 14.630. The individual may only represent one VA claimant unless a request is submitted to the VA’s OGC.
Notes: 
For the purpose of this guidance a claim refers to one or more issue(s) submitted for adjudication as provided in 38 CFR 3.155, and covered under one end product. 
The representative retains representation until all issues within the scope of the claim have been finally adjudicated as provided in 38 CFR 3.160(d).  
Note:  If a person purporting to be a representative does not fit into one of the categories above, write to the individual (and provide a copy of the correspondence to the claimant) explaining that
they do not appear to fit into one of the categories of permitted representatives per 38 CFR 14.629 and 38 CFR 14.630, and
VA will not recognize the representation unless they show VA that they dofit into one of the categories of permitted representatives. 

I.i.2.A.2.b.  Definition:  Declaration of Representation

A declaration of representation is the form a claimant uses to designate a person or organization as their representative for VA purposes.

I.i.2.A.2.c.  Declaration of Representation Requirements 

The table below lists the declaration of representation required for different types of representatives.   
A/An …
May represent a claimant if VA receives a …
accredited representative of a VSO
properly completed and executed VA Form 21-22, Appointment of Veterans Service Organization as Claimant’s Representative, that shows the service organization as representative.
accredited agent
properly completed and executed VA Form 21-22a, Appointment of Individual as Claimant’s Representative.
non-licensed individual
declaration of representation that complies with the provisions outlined in 38 CFR 14.630 to include a properly completed and executed VA Form 21-22a.
 
Note:  The representation is for a one-time, one-claim basis only.
Reference:  For more information on appointing an individual for one-time, one-claim representation, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2.a.
accredited attorney
properly completed and executed VA Form 21-22a.
Note:  If the claimant’s attorney is not listed on OGC’s accreditation search page, 
the regional office’s (RO's) Agent and Attorney Fee Coordinator will advise the
attorney that VA will not recognize them until accredited, and
claimant that they may
seek other representation, or
proceed without representation until the attorney is accredited.
References:  For more information on 
what constitutes a complete VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.e, and
how to acknowledge a POA representative, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.i and j. 

I.i.2.A.2.d.  Unlimited Versus Limited Representation

Unlimited representation means that the representative represents the claimant for all VA claims.
 
Limited representation means that the representation is for a specific claim or claims.  It is possible to have multiple representatives providing limited representation. 
Assume that representation is unlimited unless VA Form 21-22, VA Form 21-22a, or the declaration of representation shows otherwise. 
 
A declaration of representation by a non-accredited individual per the provisions of 38 CFR 14.630 is limited to one claim by its very nature.
Reference:  For more information on limited representation see,
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.b, and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.2.b.

 
3.  Representation of Incompetent Claimants 

Introduction

This topic contains information on representation of incompetent claimants, including
fiduciary appointment for an incompetent Veteran
representation for claimants in the process of being declared incompetent, and
appointing a representative to establish competency.

Change Date

March 20, 2025

I.i.2.A.3.a.  Fiduciary Appointment for an Incompetent Veteran

If the claimant is unable to handle their own VA benefit payments, VA appoints a fiduciary to handle the payment of VA funds.

I.i.2.A.3.b.  Representation for Claimants in the Process of Being Declared Incompetent

Until a fiduciary is appointed for a claimant in the process of being declared incompetent, accept the appointment of a representative from any of the following people in the following order
claimant
claimant’s guardian
spouse
parent
other relative or friend (if interests are not adverse), or
director of the hospital in which the claimant is maintained.
Once VA appoints a fiduciary, the fiduciary may appoint a new POA representative.  The prior representative is not automatically revoked.
References:  For more information on
signature requirements when appointing a representative, see
38 CFR 14.631(a)(1), and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.e, and
representation of beneficiaries in the fiduciary program, see 38 CFR 13.40.

I.i.2.A.3.c.  Appointing a Representative to Establish Competency

An incompetent claimant may appoint a representative for the purpose of attempting to establish competency.

  
 4.  Extent of Authority and Duties of Representatives 

Introduction

This topic contains information on the extent of a representative’s authority, including
general scope of a representative's authority
representative’s authority to submit claims and other claim-related documents
authorization of associate attorneys and attorney support staff
duties that authorized law students, legal interns, and paralegals can perform
information technology (IT) access and other disclosures
representative’s access to Federal tax information (FTI), and
questions or disputes about representatives.

Change Date

November 13, 2024

I.i.2.A.4.a.  General Scope of a Representative’s Authority

A representative is appointed, in the wording of the VA Form 21-22 and VA Form 21-22a, to “prepare, present, and prosecute” a claim. To discharge those duties, an appointed representative explicitly or implicitly has the authority to
review the claimant’s records, subject to limitations specified in the VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, and/or by law
submit information, evidence, and argument on behalf of the claimant, to include eliciting witness testimony at a hearing
authorize administrative changes on behalf of the claimant related to a claim such as changing a claimant’s address in VA records, establishing a direct deposit account, or changing a direct deposit account, subject to existing VA procedures 
coordinate with VA on development matters such as the scheduling of a hearing or an examination
prepare and submit forms and other procedural documents on behalf of the claimant, and
withdraw a claim at any stage of adjudication. 
Important:  This list is illustrative and not exclusive, and a duly appointed representative also has the rights or authority to perform any other functions specified elsewhere in the M21-1.
 
References:  For more information on
a representative’s authority to submit claims and other claim related documents, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.4.b
a representative's authority to review a claims folder, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.B.2
withdrawing a claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.1
withdrawing a decision review request, see M21-5, Chapter 4, Topic 4
withdrawing a legacy appeal, see 
38 CFR 19.55, and
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section A.3
updating contact information and direct deposit processing, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.B.1, and
M27-1, Part I, 3.10
hearings at the RO, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.D, and
Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA) hearings, see M21-5, Chapter 7, Section H.

I.i.2.A.4.b.  Representative’s Authority to Submit Claims and Other Claim-Related Documents 

A properly appointed representative has the authority to prepare and submit certain types of claims and other claim-related documents on behalf of the represented individual without that individual’s signature.  Those include, but are not limited to, a(n)
request for an application for benefits
intent to file (ITF) a claim
supplemental claim
request for revision of a decision based on clear and unmistakable error
request for higher-level review
legacy notice of disagreement (NOD), or
legacy substantive appeal.
A POA may prepare and submit, but may not sign, documents that require the claimant’s signature.  Those include:
original applications for Veterans benefits
forms requiring claimant certification, such as eligibility verification reports. 
VA Form 21-4140, Employment Questionnaire 
VA Form 21-8940, Veteran’s Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability
VA Form 21-4142, Authorization to Disclose Information to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
VA Form 21-4192, Request for Employment Information in Connection With Claim for Disability Benefits
VA Form 21-0538, Mandatory Verification of Dependents
VA Form 21-8951-2, Notice of Waiver of VA Compensation or Pension to Receive Military Pay and Allowances, and
VA Form 21-651, Election of Compensation in Lieu of Retired Pay or Waiver of Retired Pay to Secure Compensation from Department of Veterans Affairs. 
Exception:  Prior to March 24, 2015, a POA representative could sign and submit an informal claim because under the prior regulation, 38 CFR 3.155, an informal claim could be accepted without the claimant’s signature.  Informal claims, which were often filed on VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, included, but were not limited to, claims for increase or to reopen.
 
References:  For more information on
signatures on ITF, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b, and
38 CFR 3.155
handling of additional correspondence signed by a POA in conjunction with a prescribed form signed by the claimant, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.c
a representative’s authority to file a legacy NOD see
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section B
38 CFR 19.21, and
38 CFR 19.50, and
a representative’s authority to file a legacy substantive appeal, see
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section E
38 CFR 19.22, and
38 CFR 19.50. 

I.i.2.A.4.c.  Authorization of Associate Attorneys and Attorney Support Staff

A claimant must consent in writing to allow associate attorneys, legal interns, law students, and paralegals employed by the same legal services office as their appointed representative to participate in the representation.
The written consent must specifically state that participation in all aspects of the claim by a legal intern, law student, or paralegal furnishing written authorization from the attorney of record is authorized.  The consent must include the
name of the Veteran or claimant (if other than the Veteran)
applicable VA file number
name of the attorney
consent of the Veteran or claimant for
use of the services of legal interns, law students, or paralegals, and
such individuals to have access to applicable VA records, and
names of the legal interns, law students, or paralegals who will be assisting in the case.
The signed consent must be submitted to VA and maintained in the claimant’s file.
Reference:  For more information on the participation of personnel affiliated with an attorney representative, see 38 CFR 14.629(c).

I.i.2.A.4.d.  Duties That Authorized Law Students, Legal Interns, and Paralegals Can Perform

Once written consent is provided by the claimant, as discussed in M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.4.c, legal interns, law students, and/or paralegals may participate in any duties involved in the preparation, presentation, and/or prosecution of a VA claim as long as they are under the direct supervision of a designated attorney of record.
The supervising attorney must be present at any hearing in which a legal intern, law student, or paralegal participates.
Reference:  For more information on the role of assistants to attorney representatives, see 38 CFR 14.629(c)(3).

I.i.2.A.4.e.  IT Access and Other Disclosures

The July 2023 or later version of VA Form 21-22a contains additional fields to authorize disclosure to affiliated personnel.
Completion of Block 19A with a name of the firm/organization is an affirmation by the claimant acknowledging they consent to giving support staff, associate attorneys, and claims agents affiliated with their representative access to their information within VA’s information technology (IT) systems.
Completion of Block 19B authorizes VA to disclose information outside VA IT systems, such as e-mails and/or phone calls, to the individuals listed by the claimant.
Note:  The VA Form 21-22a is incomplete if
box 19A or 19B is checked but no firm, organization, and/or individual is listed, or
the name of the firm, organization, and/or individual is listed, but the 19A or 19B check box is blank. 
Claims processors will need to follow incomplete form procedures as directed in M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.h. 

I.i.2.A.4.f.  Representative’s Access to FTI

Special procedures govern a representative’s access to Federal tax information (FTI) in the possession of VA, received from Internal Revenue Service and Social Security Administration.  Refer to these special procedures governing the FTI match for information about a representative’s right of access to these materials.
 
Reference:  For more information on disclosure of FTI to a POA, see M21-1, Part XIV, 4.B.3.c.

I.i.2.A.4.g.  Questions or Disputes About Representatives

Refer any legal questions or disputes about the extent of a person’s authority to serve as a representative to the District Counsel.
 
Reference:  For more information on referring questions and disputes to the District Counsel, see
38 CFR 14.629, and
38 CFR 14.631(d).

  
5.  Requests for Exclusive Contact 

Introduction

This topic contains information on requests for exclusive contact, including
definition of exclusive contact, and
handling requests for exclusive contact.

Change Date

June 19, 2015

I.i.2.A.5.a.  Definition:  Exclusive Contact

The term exclusive contact refers to sending communications with the claimant directly to a representative and generally not communicating directly with the claimant.
Important:  VA does not honor requests for exclusive contact to restrict the communication between VA and the claimant. 

I.i.2.A.5.b.  Handling Requests for Exclusive Contact

In any case where an attorney requests exclusive contact in writing, send the attorney a letter incorporating the following notice:
We are unable to comply with your request that we correspond exclusively with you and not with the VA claimant you represent. 
While VA has attempted in the past to accommodate exclusive contact requests, the agency has found that our attempts to comply with these requests adversely impacted the timely completion of essential ministerial functions, such as responding to phone inquiries from claimants and the issuance of standard benefit information letters.  Rather, as required by regulatory and statutory provisions, we have determined that corresponding directly with the VA claimant with a copy of each and every communication to the representative is the best means for keeping all interested persons up-to-date about VA’s actions regarding a particular claimant.  This course of action is consistent with the non-adversarial nature of the VA benefits adjudication system and with VA statutes and regulations.
To this end, section 5104(a) of title 38, United States Code, and its implementing regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.103, provide that VA must send notice of any decision to the claimant with a copy to the claimant's representative.  VA statutes and regulations do not require a process whereby VA maintains "exclusive contact" with a representative in lieu of the VA claimant.  At the same time, despite any request for exclusive contact with a representative, VA has always sent automatically generated correspondence to VA claimants and has responded to claimants who seek information directly from VA.  As a result of our careful review of relevant VA statutes, regulations and procedures, we have determined that prohibiting claimants from receiving information, any information, about their claims, or limiting it in some fashion, is not a process that is beneficial to Veterans, their dependents or survivors.  We can assure you, however, that as long as you represent a VA claimant, you will be sent copies of any and all notices, decisions or other written communications at the same time as the claimant is sent such notice, decision or communication.
Note:  In the case of a verbal request for exclusive contact or inquiry about exclusive contact, use the above notice to structure a response.  Remember to document any contacts on a VA Form 27-0820, Report of General Information.

  
6.  Revoking and Terminating Representation 

Introduction

This topic contains information on revoking and terminating representation, including
how representation ends
express revocation of representation by the represented individual
implicit revocation of representation by appointment of a new representative
withdrawal of representatives from representation
representation terminated by death, and
expiration of limited representation.

Change Date

May 20, 2020

I.i.2.A.6.a.  How Representation Ends

Once duly established by appointment, a representation relationship can end in a variety of ways.
The represented party may
choose to expressly revoke a representative’s appointment, or 
implicitly revoke a representative’s appointment in whole or in part by appointing another representative.
The representative may choose to withdraw from representation.  
Representation can end without specific action by the representative or represented individual such where there is
death of the represented individual or 
completion of a limited representation. 
References:  For more information on
various means by which representative relationship may end, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.6.b-f
VA representation, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.1
appointing a representative, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2
unlimited versus limited representation, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2.d, and
system updates related to representation, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.

I.i.2.A.6.b.  Express Revocation of Representation by the Represented Individual

A represented individual (generally, a claimant or beneficiary, guardian, or fiduciary) may end the relationship with their appointed representative at any time by expressly (explicitly, clearly) telling VA.  This is known as express revocation of the representative’s appointment.
Examples:
“I don’t want American Legion to be my representative anymore.”
“Please remove Disabled American Veterans as my representative immediately.” 
Important:  The act of a represented individual submitting paperwork to appoint a new representative is not express revocation.  However, this may be sufficient to implicitly revoke an appointment.
 
When a claimant expressly revokes representation, take the actions specified in M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.f.
 
References:  For more information on
processing requests to revoke a representative, to include notifying a revoked representative, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.f
required system updates for changes in POA appointments, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.2
the guidelines for changing representation after certification and transfer of an appeal, see M21-5, Chapter 7, Section F, 5.e, and
implicit revocation of representation by appointment of a new representative, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.6.c.

I.i.2.A.6.c.  Implicit Revocation of Representation by Appointment of a New Representative

An individual’s existing representation is considered ended, and the representative’s appointment implicitly revoked, without need for a clear or explicit statement when
VA receives a completed appointment of a new representative, signed by both the individual and the representative, and 
the scope of the new representation is inconsistent with the continued representation by the current representative. 
Explanation:  The new, fully-signed appointment document is sufficient to appoint the new representative, and – because both representatives cannot provide the same representation – it can be inferred that the represented individual wants to revoke their existing representative’s appointment to the extent inconsistent with the new appointment, even when they don’t explicitly or clearly say so.
When a new appointment is unlimited, that is always inconsistent with continuation of unlimited or limited representation under the existing appointment.  The existing appointment is implicitly revoked as long as the new appointment is completed and signed by the parties.  
 
However, a new limited appointment may or may not be inconsistent with continuation of existing representation and will not always cause implicit revocation of the current appointment.  As noted in M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2.d, it is possible to have multiple representatives providing limited representation.
When representation under the existing appointment is unlimited, a new limited appointment is inconsistent only with respect to the claims or issues named in that appointment.  The existing appointment is not fully revoked; it remains in effect for the issues not named in the new appointment. 
When representation under the existing representation is limited, a new limited appointment is inconsistent with continued representation by the existing representative on overlapping claims or issues but not on continuing claims or issues not included in the new appointment.  
Where implicit revocation occurs, and representation is updated, take the actions specified in M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.f.
If a new appointment sufficient to implicitly revoke an existing appointment raises questions about the individual’s intent, request clarification from the claimant and add any clarification received to the claims folder.  For example, if there is limited, fee-based representation by an attorney under a VA Form 21-22a for review of an initial decision, and an unlimited VA Form 21-22 is received in favor of a VSO, seek clarification from the claimant before updating the representation and revoking the attorney representation.  The new filing raises a question of whether the claimant actually intends to revoke attorney/agent representation and to have the VSO handle the claims on review instead.
 
Important:  If a newly received appointment in favor of a new representative is notsigned by both the representative and the individual, the document is not sufficient to create a new representation relationship and does not constitute an implicit revocation of the existing appointment.  Although the new, incompletely-signed appointment suggests that the individual’s intent is to replace his/her current representative, that alone is not enough to constitute an express revocation – even if the appointment on its face was unlimited.  In such instances, follow the guidance in M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.h, on handling an incomplete appointment document.
 
References:  For more information on 
the requirement for a new appointment to be signed by both parties for implicit revocation to occur, see 38 CFR 14.631(f)(1)
the requirement that an appointment of a representative be complete, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2.c
processing revocations and new appointments, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C
limited and unlimited representation, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.2.d, and
express revocation, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.6.b. 

I.i.2.A.6.d.  Withdrawal of Representatives From Representation

A representative may withdraw from representation by notifying the claimant and VA in writing, if doing so would not adversely impact the claimant’s interests. 
 
A representative may also withdraw for good cause, including in the case where the representative reasonably believes representation is furthering a claimant’s persistent fraudulent or criminal course of action, or if the claimant fails to uphold an obligation to the representative regarding the representation.
 
Note:   In a legacy appeal to which the law prior to February 19, 2019, applies, a representative may withdraw prior to certification as long as they have complied with 38 CFR 14.631.
 
When a representative withdraws from representation, VA must provide notice and update VA systems.
 
References:  For more information on
processing requests to revoke or change a representative, to include notifying a revoked representative, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.f
required system updates for changes in POA appointments, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.2
withdrawing representation, see 38 CFR 14.631(c), and
withdrawing representation before BVA, see 38 CFR 20.6.

I.i.2.A.6.e.  Representation Terminated by Death

Representation ends when a represented person dies.
 
References:  For more information on
revoking a POA due to death of the represented individual, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1.f
Veteran first notice of death processing, see M21-1, Part XI, Subpart i, 1.A, and
representation of survivors after the claimant’s death, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.7.

I.i.2.A.6.f.  Expiration of Limited Representation

Limited representation (including one-time, one-claim representation under 38 CFR 14.630) may end on its own terms without specific action from the representative or represented individual when a triggering condition occurs – typically when the claim for which the representation was provided is finally adjudicated.
 
This is completion or expiration of the representation agreed upon.  It is not the same as affirmative revocation or termination of representation or a withdrawal from representation. 

  
 7.  Representation of Survivors After the Claimant’s Death 

Change Date

February 19, 2019

I.i.2.A.7.a.  Automatically Revoked POA Does Not Allow Survivor Representation 

Representation based on a POA signed by the claimant during their lifetime ends with the death of the claimant and does not extend to any survivors.  In order for the same representative to represent a survivor, the survivor must execute a separate POA.
References:  For more information on 
the policy expressed in this block, see Smith (Irma) v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 330 (1997), and
representation terminated by death, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.6.e.


M21-1, Part I, Subpart ii, Chapter 2 - Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Benefit Programs
Article ID: 554400000181485
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Overview of Compensation and Pension for Veterans
2
Overview of VA Survivors Benefits
3
Additional Allowance for Dependents
4
Ancillary Benefits
5
Aid and Attendance (A&A) or Housebound Allowance


 
1.  Overview of Compensation and Pension for Veterans
 

Introduction

This topic contains definitions of VA Veterans benefits, including
service-connected (SC) disability compensation
38 U.S.C. 1151 compensation, and
Veterans Pension.

Change Date

September 24, 2019

I.ii.2.1.a.  Definition:  SC Disability Compensation

Service-connected (SC) disability compensation is a monthly payment made to a Veteran discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable who the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) determines has a disability resulting from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during active service.
 
References:  For more information on 
disability compensation, see 38 CFR 3.4(b)(1), and
determining service connection, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.

I.ii.2.1.b.  Definition: 38 U.S.C. 1151 Compensation

38 U.S.C. 1151 compensation is a payment for additional disability or death that is proximately caused by 
VA fault or an event not reasonably foreseeable in the provision of VA hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination, or
the individual’s participation in vocational rehabilitation services or compensated work therapy.
Reference:  For more information on 38 U.S.C. 1151 compensation, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 6. 

I.ii.2.1.c.  Definition:  Veterans Pension

Veterans Pension is a benefit paid to a Veteran who
is permanently and totally disabled as determined by 
VA, or
the Social Security Administration
is in a nursing home for long-term care, as a presumption of disability, or
has reached the age of 65 years.
Eligibility requires meeting certain service requirements pertaining to length of service and service during a period of war, and certain income and net worth limitations.
Reference:  For more information on Veterans Pension, see
38 CFR 3.3(a)(3)
38 CFR 3.17
38 CFR 3.270, and
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 1.

 
2.  Overview of VA Survivors Benefits
 

Introduction

This topic contains definitions of VA survivors benefits, including
Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC)
Survivors Pension
death compensation, and
accrued benefits.

Change Date

June 21, 2015

I.ii.2.2.a.  Definition: DIC

Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) is a monthly payment made
to a surviving spouse, child, or parent because of an SC death that occurred after December 31, 1956
to a surviving spouse or child because the Veteran had been rated as totally disabled due to an SC disability prior to his/her death, typically for at least ten years, per 38 U.S.C. 1318
to a surviving spouse, child, or parent because of death due to VA medical treatment, per 38 U.S.C. 1151, or
because a surviving spouse, child, or parent elects DIC in the case of an SC death that occurred before January 1, 1957.
Reference:  For more information on DIC, see
38 CFR 3.5
38 CFR 3.22
38 CFR 3.358
38 CFR 3.702, and
M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i.

I.ii.2.2.b.  Definition: Survivors Pension

Survivors Pension is a benefit paid to a surviving spouse or child because of a Veteran’s non-service-connected death.
Basic eligibility requires meeting certain service requirements pertaining to length of service and service during a period of war, and certain income and net worth limitations.
Reference:  For more information on Survivors Pension, see 
38 CFR 3.3(b), and
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 2.

I.ii.2.2.c.  Definition:  Death Compensation

Death compensation is a monthly payment made because of an SC death occurring before January 1, 1957.
Note:  Generally, new entitlement to this benefit can no longer be established since the Veteran must have died prior to 1957.
Reference:  For more information on death compensation, see 
38 CFR 3.4(c), and
M21-1, Part XII, Subpart ii, 1.

I.ii.2.2.d.  Definition: Accrued Benefits

Accrued benefits are benefits that are due to the beneficiary based on an existing decision on a claim for benefits or evidence in the Veteran’s claims folder at the date of death, but not paid prior to death.
Reference:  For more information on accrued benefits, see 
38 CFR 3.1000, and
M21-1, Part XI, Subpart ii, 3.

                                                                
3.  Additional Allowance for Dependents
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about an additional allowance for dependents, including
general policy regarding additional allowance for dependents
entitlement of surviving spouses to additional DIC or Survivors Pension for children
payments to children over age 18, and
allowance for dependent parents.

Change Date

June 21, 2015

I.ii.2.3.a.  General Policy Regarding Additional Allowance for Dependents

An additional allowance for a spouse and children may be paid to Veterans who are receiving payments for compensation evaluated at 30 percent or more or for pension.
Payments for an unmarried child can continue
until the child reaches age
18, or
23, if the child continues in an approved school, or
indefinitely if the child becomes incapable of self-support prior to age 18.
Reference:  For more information on dependents, see
38 CFR 3.4(b)(2)
38 CFR 3.57
38 CFR 3.23(d)(1)
38 CFR 3.356, and
M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.C.

I.ii.2.3.b.  Entitlement of Surviving Spouses to Additional DIC or Survivors Pension for Children

Surviving spouses are entitled to additional DIC or Survivors Pension for the Veteran’s children.
Payments for an unmarried child can continue
until the child reaches age
18, or
23, if the child continues in an approved school, or
indefinitely if the child becomes incapable of self-support prior to age 18.
References:  For more information on payments for children, see
DIC and additional allowances, see M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 4.B.1
awards involving a child that is permanently incapable of self-support, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.B.3
Survivors pension for a child, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 2.1, and
requirements to be considered a child, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 3.A.

I.ii.2.3.c.  Payments to Children Over Age 18

The table below explains how benefits are paid for children over age 18.
For …
Payments …
DIC
are always made directly to the child, unless the child is incompetent.
Survivors Pension
can be made directly to the child (or the child's fiduciary) if there is no surviving spouse.


I.ii.2.3.d.  Allowance for Dependent Parents

Veterans in receipt of compensation evaluated at 30 percent or more may also receive an additional allowance for dependent parents.
Reference:  For more information on an additional allowance for dependent parents, see 
38 CFR 3.4(b)(2), and
M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 4.B.

 
4.  Ancillary Benefits
 

Introduction

This topic contains definitions of ancillary benefits that are related to, or derived from the entitlement of SC benefits, including
clothing allowance
automobile or other conveyance allowance
specially adapted housing  (SAH) and special home adaptation (SHA) grants
vocational rehabilitation under 38 U.S.C. 31
dependents’ educational assistance (DEA) under 38 U.S.C. 35, and
special allowance payable under Section 156 of Public Law (PL) 97-377.  

Change Date

December 11, 2023

I.ii.2.4.a.  Definition:  Clothing Allowance

Clothing allowance is an annual lump-sum payment made when
a Veteran’s SC disability causes the use of certain prosthetic or orthopedic appliances (including a wheelchair) that tend to wear or tear clothing, or
the use of physician-prescribed medication for an SC skin condition causes irreparable damage to outer garments.
Reference:  For more information on clothing allowance, see
38 CFR 3.810, and
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 8.A.

I.ii.2.4.b.  Definition: Automobile or Other Conveyance Allowance

Automobile or other conveyance allowance is a benefit of financial assistance toward the purchase price of a vehicle when a Veteran or service member has one of the following SC disabilities:
loss, or permanent loss of use, of one or both
feet, or
hands
permanent impairment of vision of both eyes to a prescribed degree
a severe burn injury, or
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Note:  Necessary adaptive equipment may be certified for the initial vehicle and for subsequent vehicles.
Reference:  For more information on automobile or other conveyance allowance and adaptive equipment, see
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.A, and
38 CFR 3.808.

I.ii.2.4.c.  Definition:  SAH and SHA Grants

Specially adapted housing (SAH) and special home adaptation (SHA) grantsassist Veterans or service members with certain SC disabilities severely affecting vision or locomotion in
adapting a presently owned home, or
acquiring or building a residence adapted with special features.
Reference:  For more information on SAH and SHA grants, see
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.B
38 CFR 3.809, and
38 CFR 3.809a.

I.ii.2.4.d.  Definition:  Vocational Rehabilitation Under 38 U.S.C. 31

Vocational rehabilitation under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 31 provides subsistence allowance as well as other services and assistance necessary for an eligible Veteran with compensable SC disabilities to
achieve maximum independence in daily living, and
obtain and maintain suitable employment.
Reference:  For more information on vocational rehabilitation, see 
38 CFR Part 21, Subpart A, and
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 5.A.

I.ii.2.4.e.  Definition:  DEA Under 38 U.S.C. 35

Dependents’ Educational Assistance (DEA) under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35provides payment of a monthly education or training allowance to the spouse and children of a Veteran who
has a total SC disability that is permanent in nature, or
died
of an SC disability, or
while an SC disability was evaluated as total and permanent in nature.
Note:  VA grants basic eligibility to DEA to service members under specific circumstances.  For more information, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 1.A.1.e.
Reference:  For more information on DEA, see
38 CFR 3.807
38 CFR 21.3021, and
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 1.A.

I.ii.2.4.f.  Definition:  Special Allowance Payable Under Section 156 of Public Law 97-377

The special allowance payable under Section 156 of Public Law (PL) 97-377 is called the Restored Entitlement Program for Survivors (REPS).  The REPS allowance is a payment to certain surviving spouses and children of individuals who died
on active duty prior to August 13, 1981, or
as a result of an SC disability that was incurred or aggravated prior to August 13, 1981.
Reference:  For more information on the special allowance payable under Section 156 of PL 97-377, see
M21-1, Part XII, Subpart ii, 3, and
38 CFR 3.812.

 
5.  A&A or Housebound Allowance
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on A&A or housebound allowance, including
an explanation of the
A&A benefit and entitlement, and
housebound benefit and entitlement, and
Veterans hospitalized at government expense.

Change Date

September 30, 2010

I.ii.2.5.a.  A&A Benefit and Entitlement

The aid and attendance (A&A) allowance is
part of special monthly compensation (SMC) or special monthly pension (SMP), and
paid because a person, due to mental or physical disability, requires the regular A&A of another person in conducting the basic activities of daily living, such as
bathing
dressing, and
going to the bathroom.
Entitlement:  Entitlement to the A&A allowance extends to the Veteran, spouse, surviving parent(s), or surviving spouse.
References:  For more information on
SMC, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A, and
38 CFR 3.350, and
SMP, see
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 1
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 2.C, and
38 CFR 3.351.

I.ii.2.5.b.  Housebound Benefit and Entitlement

The housebound allowance is
part of SMC or SMP, and 
paid because a person, due to a mental or physical disability, has very limited ability to leave home.
Entitlement to the housebound benefit extends to the Veteran and surviving spouse only.
References:  For more information on
SMC, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A, and
38 CFR 3.350, and
SMP, see
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 1
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 2.C, and
38 CFR 3.351.

I.ii.2.5.c.  Veterans Hospitalized at Government Expense

A Veteran who is entitled to A&A and who is hospitalized at government expense can only receive the Housebound rate until released from the hospital.
Exceptions:  This policy is subject to the exceptions in 38 CFR 3.552(a)(2).
M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, Chapter 3 - Claims Jurisdiction and Transfer
Article ID: 554400000174868
Updated Sep 29, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Jurisdiction of Claims
2
Transfer of Paper Claims Folders


 
1.  Jurisdiction of Claims
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on jurisdiction of claims, including
general policy for jurisdiction of claims 
jurisdiction of claims involving a special mission or circumstance, and
determining jurisdiction of claims involving multiple special missions or circumstances.

Change Date

September 12, 2022

II.ii.3.1.a.  General Policy for Jurisdiction of Claims

A claim is generally assigned by the National Work Queue (NWQ) to the geographical area where the Veteran or survivor maintains a permanent address and is generally under the jurisdiction of an office/station known as a regional office (RO).  At times the jurisdiction will specifically fall under a pension management center (PMC).
Notes: 
Jurisdiction of a claim includes jurisdiction of the paper claims folder if one exists, unless instructions state otherwise.
An RO or PMC maintains jurisdiction for folders stored at the Federal Archives and Records Center.
Generally, a PMC will handle claims involving
pension benefits
claims for survivors benefits, and
accrued benefits.
References:  For more information on,
office locations, see the Facilities Locator and Leadership Directory 
geographical alignment of ROs and PMCs, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart ii, 1.B.2.b, and
jurisdiction of requests for higher-level review, see M21-5, Chapter 5, Topic 1.d.

II.ii.3.1.b.  Jurisdiction of Claims Involving a Special Mission or Circumstance

NWQ will distribute claims involving a special mission or circumstance according to jurisdiction and ranking rules determined by the Office of Field Operations (OFO).  Proper routing may require the use of special issue indicators and corporate flashes. 
 
If a station receives a claim that does not fall under their jurisdiction, authorized personnel may transfer the claim to the correct station in accordance with OFO guidelines.
The table below indicates what station has jurisdiction of a claim that involves a special mission or circumstance.
Special Mission or Circumstance
Jurisdiction
Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) employee-Veteran, relative of employee, or a national service officer
restricted access claims centers (RACCs) 
Reference:  For more information on RACCs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.B.
live compensation claims and legacy appeals involving 
a foreign residence
residence in enemy territory, and
cases involving an Army Post Office or a Fleet Post Office address
 
Pittsburgh RO
Notes:  
Jurisdiction is determined according to the Veteran’s residence, not the residence of a dependent.
A transient is not considered to be residing in a foreign country. 
Exception:  When a Veteran files a claim for Chapter 18 benefits and the child lives in a foreign territory, the claim will be worked by the Pittsburgh RO.
Reference:  For more information on foreign residence, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 3.B.
live compensation claims and legacy appeals involving residence in a U.S. Territory
Jurisdiction for U.S. Territory compensation claims and legacy appeals is as follows:
Honolulu RO has jurisdiction for American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands (Rota, Saipan and Tinian)
Manila RO has jurisdiction for the Philippines, and
San Juan RO has jurisdiction for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
all in-service death claims
Philadelphia RO
Notes:  
The Philadelphia Veterans Service Center (VSC) has sole jurisdiction over all original in-service death claims, to include in-service death claims received from multiple claimants prior to the adjudication of the original claim.  
The Philadelphia PMC has jurisdiction over all non-original in-service death claims received after the adjudication of the original claim.
Reference:  For more information on in-service death claims, see M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 1.C.
pension and survivor claims in which
the primary beneficiary or claimant resides in a foreign country, or
any payee whose income affects entitlement to Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, receives the income in a foreign currency
Jurisdiction for
service-connected (SC) death and burial claims are the Philadelphia PMC's including claims from the Philippines, and
all remaining PMC claims (to include supplemental claims for Dependency Indemnity Compensation (DIC) where SC death was already granted) from
the Philippines, are the Milwaukee PMC's, and
all other foreign countries, jurisdiction is shared between the Milwaukee and St. Paul PMC.
References:  For more information on 
PMC jurisdiction of non-foreign residence claims or specific jurisdiction of claim type, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart ii, 1.B.2.b, and
eligibility for benefits based on Philippine service, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 4.A.2.
higher-level reviews and legacy appeals for pension and survivor claims
decision review operations center
rating action related to Polish and Czechoslovakian Veterans who
file a claim for service connection (SC), or
apply for health care under 38 U.S.C. 109
Wilmington RO
 
Exception:  A claim from a Polish or Czechoslovakian Veteran with no service in the U.S. Armed Forces should be denied for no qualifying service by the RO that receives the claim.
 
Note:  VA does not assign a folder or number to these claims.
 
Reference:  For more information on Polish and Czechoslovakian Veterans who served in the U.S. Armed Forces, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 3.G.1.b.
claims involving Public Law (PL) 97-37, Section 156, Restored Entitlement Program for Survivors (REPS)
Jurisdiction is split between
the various ROs or PMCs, and
a special processing unit at the St. Louis RO.
Note:  The office having jurisdiction of the deceased Veteran’s claims folder is responsible for determining basic eligibility and forwarding the claim (but not the deceased Veteran’s claims folder) to the St. Louis RO.
Reference:  For more information on jurisdiction of claims involving REPS, see M21-1, Part XII, Subpart ii, 3.A.
Philippine cases involving Veterans of the Commonwealth Army of the Philippines while such forces were in the
Armed Forces of the U.S. (July 26, 1941, through June 30, 1946)
Special Philippine Scouts (enlisted between October 6, 1945, and June 30, 1947), and
Alleged or Recognized Guerrilla Service (before July 1, 1946)
Manila RO has exclusive and permanent jurisdiction unless otherwise indicated.
 
Exception:  The Philadelphia PMC has jurisdiction of burial and SC death claims and the Milwaukee PMC has jurisdiction of all remaining PMC claims (to include supplemental claims for DIC where SC death was already granted) based on service by Veterans within the Commonwealth Army of the Philippines.
 
Reference:  For more information on eligibility for benefits based on Philippine service, M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 4.A.2.
cases involving incompetent Veterans
If a court has appointed a fiduciary for an incompetent Veteran, jurisdiction lies with the RO or PMC for the area in which the appointing court is located.
claims for SC based on radiation exposure where the existence of a radiogenic disease has been verified
Jackson RO
References:  For more information on
how the Jackson RO receives jurisdiction of a radiation claim, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 4.A.2.a, and
radiation claims processing, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 4.A.2, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 4.B.2.
claims and legacy appeals for SC based on exposure to mustard gas or Lewisite
Muskogee RO
Reference:  For more information on claims for SC based on exposure to mustard gas or Lewisite, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 3.A.2.
claims and legacy appeals for SC based on exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune that meet specific criteria
Louisville RO
Reference:  For more information on the criteria determining jurisdiction of Camp Lejeune issues, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 8.A.1.c.
forfeiture cases
St. Paul RACC
 
Reference:  For more information about forfeiture cases, see
M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 3.B, and
38 CFR 3.900.
residents of the Armed Forces Retirement Home, or St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in Washington, D.C.
Roanoke RO
 
Reference:  For more information on claims from residents of the Armed Forces Retirement Home or St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in Washington, D.C., see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart iii, 5.
Veterans with any service prior to July 16, 1903
Philadelphia PMC
entitlement to compensation under the former general law, the Act of 1862, as amended
protection of the general law rate provided by former PL 788, 74th Congress
entitlement to Reserve Officer’ Retirement Pay under PL 262, 77th Congress, and
entitlement under a special act of Congress authorizing payment to a particular person
Philadelphia PMC
References:  For more information on
general law cases, see 38 U.S.C. 1152, and
entitlement under a special act, see
38 CFR 3.801
38 CFR 10.20, and
38 CFR 11.109.
Chapter 31 educational benefits based on service in allied forces
Philadelphia PMC
Chapter 18 benefits for certain children with disabilities born of Vietnam and certain Korean service Veterans
Denver RO
 
Exception:  When a Veteran files a claim for Chapter 18 benefits and the child lives in a foreign territory, the claim will be worked by the Pittsburgh RO.
 
Reference:  For more information on handling of claims for benefits under Chapter 18, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 3.A-E.
  
Notes:  
Do not transfer a paper claims folder to a special mission station unless
a special mission claim has been established, or
instructions indicate the special mission station must maintain the folder.
Claims and/or claimants involving litigated issues may be subject to special review or processing.  Special instructions for identification and processing identified cases will be issued by VA Central Office (VACO) and may involve use of special issue indicators, corporate flashes, or other claim attributes.
References:  For more information on
claim attributes that affect routing, see M21-4, Appendix C
use of corporate flashes, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.F.1.b, and
M21-4, Appendix C.2
special issue indicators, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.F.2, and
transferring a claim, see the Veterans Benefits Management System Core User Guide.

II.ii.3.1.c.  Determining Jurisdiction of Claims Involving Multiple Special Missions or Circumstances

The table below indicates what station has jurisdiction of a claim that involves multiple special missions or circumstances.
  
Special Mission(s) or Circumstances
Jurisdiction
Integrated Disability Evaluation System, along with
any other special mission
Providence RO, and
Seattle RO
Exception:  A RACC claim from an employee of the Providence RO would be handled by the Seattle RO and vice versa.
Benefits Delivery at Discharge, along with
any other special mission
The special mission RO.
C-123 aircraft, along with
one of the following special missions: 
mustard gas
radiation
Camp Lejeune, or
VACO Special Issue 2
St. Paul RO
Camp Lejeune, along with
VACO Special Issue 2
Louisville RO
foreign, along with
one of the following special missions: 
C-123 aircraft
mustard gas
radiation
Camp Lejeune, or
VACO Special Issue 2
Pittsburgh RO
mustard gas, along with
one of the following special missions: 
radiation
Camp Lejeune, or
VACO Special Issue 2
Muskogee RO
radiation, along with
one of the following special missions: 
Camp Lejeune, or
VACO Special Issue 2
Jackson RO
Manila jurisdiction, along with
any other special mission
The special mission RO.  If translation or fraud issues need to be addressed, the special mission station will contact NWQ to have the claim transferred.
San Juan jurisdiction, along with
any other special mission
The special mission RO.  If translation is needed, the special mission station will contact NWQ to have the claim transferred.
RACC, along with
foreign
RACC
RACC, along with
Camp Lejeune
RACC
 
Exception:  A claim from an employee of the St. Paul RACC would be handled by the Louisville RO.
RACC, along with
one of the following special missions: 
C-123 aircraft, or
VACO Special Issue 2
RACC
 
Exception:  A claim from an employee of the St. Paul RACC would be handled by the Milwaukee RO.
RACC, along with
one of and the following special missions: 
mustard gas, or
radiation
The special mission RO. 
 
Exception:  A claim from an employee at the special mission RO would be handled by the RACC.
In-service death, along with
any other special mission
Philadelphia RO
Notes:  
The Philadelphia VSC has sole jurisdiction over all original in-service death claims to include in-service death claims received from multiple claimants prior to the adjudication of the original claim.
The Philadelphia PMC has jurisdiction over all non-original in-service death claims received after the adjudication of the original claim.
 
Reference:  For more information on RACCs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.B.

2.  Transfer of Paper Claims Folders

Introduction

This topic contains information about the general policies for the transfer of paper claims folders, including
general restriction on transfers of paper claims folders
Federal records center (FRC) facility codes for folder requests
requesting transfer of paper claims folders from an FRC
following up on requests from an FRC, and
procedure to recall folders from VA Record Center and Vault (RC&V).

Change Date

January 15, 2021 

II.ii.3.2.a.  General Restriction on Transfers of Paper Claims Folders

VA has transitioned to an electronic claims processing environment and with the exception of some restricted access records, no longer maintains paper claims folders.  When an RO requests a paper claims folders that is stored at a Federal records center (FRC) or VA Record Center and Vault (RC&V), the claims folder will be sent to the scanning facility for digitization.
 
Paper claims folders should not be sent to any location other than an authorized scanning facility, unless otherwise directed by OFO.
 
Exception:  RACCs are authorized to receive and maintain paper claims folders from an FRC or VA RC&V if the file
has been designated as a restricted record, and
is not eligible for digitization.
References:  For more information on historical rules for the
permanent transfer of paper claims folders, see the attachments
Historical_M21-1III_ii_5_SecD_2-19-19.docx, and
Historical_M21-1III_ii_5_SecE_2-19-19.docx, and
temporary transfer of paper claims folders, see the attachment Historical_M21-1III_ii_5_SecF_1-14-18.docx.

II.ii.3.2.b.  FRC Facility Codes for Folder Requests

The FRC station code is shown on the BIRLS FOLDER LOCATION tab in Share.  The table below contains FRC location codes and which specific location to send the folder request to.
 
FRC Station Code
Location
Transfer Date
Folder Request Location
010
Boston
not applicable (N/A)
010 Boston
011
Pittsfield
N/A
011 Pittsfield
020
Bayonne
ALL
059 Lee's Summit
021
Philadelphia
1954 – 1985
059 Lee's Summit
030
Washington National Records Center
1952
These records are no longer owned by VA.  To request a copy of a record at this location, contact
 
William Seibert
(314) 801-0909
william.siebert@nara.gov.
030
Washington National Records Center
February - July 1955

030
Washington National Records Center
1962 – 1978
060 Lenexa
040
Atlanta
1973 & Prior
060 Lenexa
040
Atlanta
1974 - 1994 (from ROs 317, 318, 322)
011 Pittsfield
040
Atlanta
1974 - 1994 (from ROs 316, 319, 320, 323, 327)
060 Lenexa (exceptions noted in next two rows)
040
Atlanta
1986 from RO 316
011 Pittsfield
040
Atlanta
1993 from RO 323
011 Pittsfield
050
Chicago
Prior to 1973
011 Pittsfield
051
Dayton
N/A
051 Dayton
052
Kingsridge
N/A
052 Kingsridge
059
Lee’s Summit
N/A
059 Lee’s Summit
060
Lenexa (previously Kansas City)
Prior to 1973
011 Pittsfield
061
St. Louis National Personnel Records Center (NPRC)
1956 - 1959 (from ROs 335, 339)
011 Pittsfield
061
St. Louis NPRC
1959 - 1966 (from RO 376)
011 Pittsfield
061
St. Louis NPRC
1960 - 1969 (from ROs 335, 339, 340, 341, 345, 442)
011 Pittsfield
061
St. Louis NPRC
1967 - 1973 (from RO 331)
011 Pittsfield
061
St. Louis NPRC
1970 - 1974 (from ROs 339, 340, 341, 345, 436, 437, 438, 442)
011 Pittsfield
070
Ft. Worth
Prior to 1977
011 Pittsfield
070
Ft. Worth
1977 - 1993
059 Lee's Summit
080
Denver
ALL
059 Lee's Summit
090
San Francisco/San Bruno
N/A
090 San Francisco/San Bruno
091
Laguna Niguel (previously Perris)
Prior to 1967
011 Pittsfield
091
Laguna Niguel
1968 – 1992
059 Lee’s Summit
100
Seattle
N/A
100 Seattle
Note:  FRCs 020, 070, and 080 are no longer active repositories.
 
Reference:  For more information about FRCs, see Federal Records Center Locations.

II.ii.3.2.c.  Requesting Transfer of Paper Claims Folders From an FRC

Requests for transfer of a paper claims folder from an FRC are submitted through the National Archives and Records Administration’s Archives and Records Centers Information System (ARCIS).
Use Share to obtain the FRC accession data from the BIRLS FOLDER LOCATION tab
log into ARCIS and initiate a request for the claims folder
create a Physical Claims File Requested tracked item, and
upload a copy of the request into the corresponding electronic claims folder (eFolder).
Note:  The FRC usually returns the folder to the requesting RO within 10 business days.
 
Reference:  For information on how to use ARCIS, to include log-in and passwords, see the ARCIS website.

II.ii.3.2.d.  Following up on Requests From an FRC

If the folder is not received within 10 business days of the original request, process a follow-up request to the FRC via ARCIS, by sending an e-mail, or by calling the FRC, and document the follow-up request in the claims folder.
 
Important:  Remember to update the Physical Claims File Requested tracked item to reflect the follow-up.
 
Reference:  For contact information, see Federal Records Center Locations.

II.ii.3.2.e.  Procedure to Recall Folders From VA RC&V

An RO’s appointed key user may electronically recall folders retired to VA RC&V using the table below.
Step
Action
1
Check the Records Management Center (RMC) Source Material Tracking System (SMTS) Portal to determine if the folder has already been selected for conversion to an electronic record.
 
If the RMC SMTS Portal
has a record of the claims folder, go to Step 4, or
does not have a record of the claims folder, go to the next step.
2
Log in to the VA RC&V Records Retrieval System (RRS).
3
Enter the following information on the electronic VA Form 0245, VA Records Center & Vault Reference Request:
Veteran’s last name and first name
last four digits of the claim number
accession number (listed on BIRLS FOLDER LOCATION screen), and
box number (listed on BIRLS FOLDER LOCATION screen).
4
Create a Physical Claims File Requested tracked item.
5
Upload a copy of the request into the corresponding eFolder.
Notes:
First-time key users must register and create a new account.  The key user will receive an email from VA RC&V when the account is activated.
VA is in the process of extracting and digitizing records held by the VA RC&V.  There may be instances in the claims folder has been selected for digitization and is en route to the scanning vendor when a claim is received.  The folder location may still show a VA RC&V location code during this period which is why the RMC SMTS Portal should be reviewed first.
References:  For more information on
VA RC&V, see the VA RC&V website
VA RC&V RRS and saving copies of electronically-submitted VA Form 0245, see the VA RC&V Electronic RRS Users Guide, and
the RMC SMTS Portal, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 1.B.5.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section A - Applications for Benefits
Article ID: 554400000174869
Updated Sep 11, 2025

﻿<-- Previous Section  Next Section-->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Applications for Benefits
2
Principles for Application Review
3
Application Guidance for Specific Types of Claims
4
Reviewing Application Completeness and Handling Variances


1.  Applications for Benefits
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on applications for benefits, including
requirements for a complete claim received on or after March 24, 2015, and
situations not requiring a prescribed form.

Change Date

September 11, 2025

II.iii.1.A.1.a.  Requirements for a Complete Claim Received on or After March 24, 2015

Effective March 24, 2015, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) only recognizes compensation, pension, survivors, and related claims if they are submitted on the required standard forms.  
Use the table below to determine the correct VA form to use based on the type of benefit sought by the claimant.
 
If the benefit sought is ...
Then the prescribed form is VA Form ...
service connection (SC) (initial)
increased evaluation, or
a claim for a permanent and total (P&T) rating
21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.
associated with a supplemental claim
20-0995, Decision Review Request:  Supplemental Claim.
associated with a request for higher-level review of a prior decision
20-0996, Decision Review Request:  Higher-Level Review.
temporary total disability rating (paragraph 29 and 30 benefits)
21-526EZ.
 
Note:  Receipt of a Report of Hospitalization at a VA hospital or military treatment facility will prompt review for entitlement to a temporary evaluation under 38 CFR 4.29 and 38 CFR 4.30 without a claimant’s submission of a claim.
 
References:  For more information on
scope of 
hospitalization ratings, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.B.1.b, and
convalescent ratings, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.C.1.d, and
claims based on reports of examination or hospitalization, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.D.
total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU)
21-8940, Veteran’s Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, or
21-4140, Employment Questionnaire, (if submitted as part of the verification process described in M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.D).
TDIU can also be claimed on VA Form 21-526EZ.
 
Notes:  
VA Form 21-8940 is not required to claim individual unemployability (IU).  However, submission of VA Form 21-8940 by the Veteran is required in the course of development of the IU claim and for the award of TDIU benefits.
VA Form 21-8940 is not an acceptable standard form for a claim for increase in the evaluation of a disability independent of a claim for IU.  However, as a part of adjudication of the TDIU issue, the evaluation of the service-connected (SC) disabilities claimed to cause unemployability must be considered.
References:  For more information on
the role of VA Form 21-8940 in development of IU claims, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.d
considering entitlement to an increased evaluation of SC disabilities when considering claims for TDIU, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.e, and
reasonably raised claims for IU, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.f and g.
child incapable of self-support benefits
21-526EZ
21-686c, Application Request to Add and/or Remove Dependents
21P-527EZ, Application for Veterans Pension
21P-534EZ, Application for DIC, Survivors Pension, and/or Accrued Benefits, or
21P-534a, Application for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation by a Surviving Spouse or Child - In-Service Death Only.
Note:  Information about a child incapable of self-support submitted by a Veteran on a timely received December 2017 or earlierversion of VA Form 21-0538, Mandatory Verification of Dependents, will be sufficient to initiate a claim to add the dependent(s) to the Veteran’s award.
Veterans Pension (initial)
21P-527EZ
dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC), Survivors Pension and accrued benefits (initial)
21P-534a (surviving spouse and child/ren only)
21P-534EZ (surviving spouse and child/ren only)
21P-535, Application for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation by Parent(s) (Including Accrued Benefits and Death Compensation when Applicable) (surviving parent(s) only), or
21P-601, Application for Accrued Amounts Due a Deceased Beneficiary, for accrued benefits only.
Notes:  
VA Form 21P-0847, Request for Substitution of Claimant Upon Death of Claimant, may also be used as a prescribed form for accrued benefits if submitted by a surviving spouse and the substitution determination results in the claimant being recognized as a valid substitute.
If an adult child, that does not meet the exception in M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.B.1.a, submits a VA Form 21P-534EZ, then a claim for accrued benefits should not be formally decided.  Instead, process the accrued portion as a request for application and send the claimant the correct form to apply for benefits (VA form 21P-601).
Reference:  For more information on actions to take upon receipt of VA Form 21-4182, Application for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation or Death Pension (Including Accrued Benefits and Death Compensation Where Applicable) From the Department of Veterans Affairs (Supplemental to Social Security Application Forms SSA-4, 5, 7 and 10), see M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 4.A.
income adjustments for running pension awards or to supplement initial applications (income/asset/net worth, liberalized legislation) 
21P-0512S-1, Old Law and Section 306 Eligibility Verification Report (Surviving Spouse)
21P-0512V-1, Old Law and Section 306 Eligibility Verification Report (Veteran)
21P-0513-1, Old Law and Section 306 Eligibility Verification Report (Children Only)
21P-0514-1, DIC Parent’s Eligibility Verification Report
21P-0516-1, Improved Pension Eligibility Verification Report (Veteran With No Children)
21P-0517-1, Improved Pension Eligibility Verification Report (Veteran with Children)
21P-0518-1, Improved Pension Eligibility Verification Report (Surviving Spouse With No Children)
21P-0519C-1, Improved Pension Eligibility Verification Report (Child or Children)
21P-0519S-1, Improved Pension Eligibility Verification Report (Surviving Spouse with Children)
21P-0969, Income and Asset Statement in Support of Claim for Pension or Parents’ Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (D.I.C.)
21P-8416, Medical Expense Report
21P-8416b, Report of Medical, Legal, and Other Expenses Incident to Recovery for Injury or Death
21P-0571, Application for Exclusion of Children’s Income
21-8049, Request for Details of Expenses
21P-4165, Pension Claim Questionnaire for Farm Income, and
21P-4185, Report of Income from Property or Business.
Exception:  VA does not require beneficiaries to use a specific form to report a change in income that will result in a decrease in benefits.  A beneficiary may report such changes
in writing
by telephone or e-mail, or
through a VA claims submission service website.
burial benefits (initial)
21P-530EZ, Application for Burial Benefits (Under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 23)
21P-530a, State or Tribal Organization Application for Interment Allowance (Under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 23), and
21P-8834, Application for Reimbursement of Headstone or Marker Expense.
specially adapted housing (SAH) or special housing adaptation (SHA)
26-4555, Application in Acquiring Specially Adapted Housing or Special Home Adaptation Grant (Title 38 U.S.C. Section 2101(a) or 2101(b)), and
26-4555c, Veteran/Servicemember's Supplemental Application for Assistance in Acquiring Specially Adapted Housing.
SAH/SHA can also be claimed on VA Form 21-526EZ.
 
Important:  
VA Form 26-4555 or 26-4555c can be used as a standalone initial claim.
VA Form 26-4555 or 26-4555c is a claim for both SAH and SHA. 
A grant of SAH renders the issue of SHA moot since SAH is the greater benefit.  SHA need not be addressed when SAH is granted.
If SAH is denied, the rating decision must address both SAH and SHA.
Note:  When eligibility is being determined in response to a request from a regional loan center referral, VA Form 26-4555 or 26-4555c is not required in the claims folder.
 
Reference:  For more information on issues that may arise from consideration of VA Form 26-4555, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii,1.A.3.c.
auto allowance
21-4502, Application for Automobile or Other Conveyance and Adaptive Equipment (Under 38 U.S.C. 3901-3904).
 
Auto allowance can also be claimed on VA Form 21-526EZ.
 
Important:  VA Form 21-4502 is required for the award of benefits and can be used as a standalone form for initial auto allowance claims.
 
Reference:  For more information on issues that may arise from consideration of VA Form 21-4502, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.c.
special monthly compensation (SMC) for housebound/aid and attendance (A&A) including spousal A&A
21-526EZ, or
21-2680, Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance.
Reference:  For more information on reviewing VA Form 21-2680 to identify the benefit sought, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.a-c.
SMC for housebound/A&A for DIC benefits
21P-534EZ
21-2680
21P-535 (Parents' DIC only), or
21-0779, Request for Nursing Home Information in Connection with Claim for Aid and Attendance (nursing home patients only).
Note:  VA Forms 21-2680 and 21-0779 are acceptable for SMC only when there is an active DIC claim or running DIC award.
Reference:  For more information on reviewing VA Form 21-2680 to identify the benefit sought, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.a-c.
special monthly pension (SMP) for housebound and/or A&A 
21P-527EZ
21-0779 (nursing home patients only)
21P-534EZ, or
21-2680.
Note:  VA Forms 21-2680 and 21-0779 are acceptable for SMP only when there is an active pension claim or running pension award.
Reference:  For more information on reviewing VA Form 21-2680 to identify claims for SMP and SMC, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.a-c.
spina bifida
21-0304, Application for Benefits for a Qualifying Veteran’s Child Born With Disabilities.
apportionment
21-0788, Information Regarding Apportionment of Beneficiary’s Award.
dependents
21P-527EZ (pension only)
21P-534EZ (survivors only)
21-686c
674-series to include 21-674, Request for Approval of School Attendance, (school children over 18 only)
21P-509, Statement of Dependency of Parent(s), (for dependent parent(s) only)
21-4170, Statement of Marital Relationship (for adding a spouse based on a common-law marriage), or
21-0538 (versions December 2017 and earlier, when timely submitted as part of the verification process described in M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.B).
Notes:  
Past versions of VA Form 21-0538, dated December 2017 or earlier, when timely submitted, could be used to initiate the process of adding a dependent to an award.
A VA Form 21-674 can be accepted as a standard form for a school child claiming DIC in their own right if the child was previously on a surviving spouse’s DIC award.
 
References:  For more information on 
when a power of attorney (POA) representative may sign prescribed forms on behalf of a claimant, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.4.a and b
handling outdated or discontinued forms, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.4
prescribed forms used for claims under 38 U.S.C. 1151, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 6.B.5.a, and
claims submitted at or prior to separation from military service, including
Benefits Delivery at Discharge, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 6.A-C, and 
Integrated Disability Evaluation System claims, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 6.E-G. 

II.iii.1.A.1.b.  Situations Not Requiring a Prescribed Form

A prescribed claim form is not required for
review based on clear and unmistakable error (CUE)
substitution
a finding of incompetency received from a first or third party, and
information that will result in a reduction in benefits, such as
removal of a dependent
a report of hospitalization at VA expense
a report that a beneficiary is a patient in a Medicaid-covered nursing home, or
a request to be reduced to the $90 rate.
References:  For more information on
accepting a request for substitution without use of VA Form 21P-0847, see 38 CFR 3.1010
requests to remove dependents from an award without a specific form, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.A.4.g
handling requests for review based on CUE, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A.2
first- or third-party requests for competency determinations, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.A.1.f
determining whether an award adjustment is necessary based on hospitalization at VA expense, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iii, 1.A.2, and
reduction of pension based on Medicaid-covered nursing home status, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 2.A. 

 
2.  Principles for Application Review
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on reviewing applications to determine the benefit sought, including
using a claimant’s entries on VA Form 21-526, Veteran’s Application for Compensation and/or Pension, to determine which benefit the claimant is seeking
discretionary application of 38 CFR 3.151(a)
processing additional correspondence received with a prescribed form
examples of situations involving additional correspondence received with a prescribed form
receipt of EZ Form requesting a different benefit application, and
considering unclaimed theories of SC.

Change Date

November 4, 2024

II.iii.1.A.2.a.  Using a Claimant’s Entries on VA Form 21-526 to Determine Which Benefit the Claimant Is Seeking

VA Form 21-526, Veteran’s Application for Compensation and/or Pension, was discontinued effective February 19, 2019.  Use the table below to determine whether a claimant’s entries on VA Form 21-526 constitute a claim for disability compensation, Veterans Pension, or both, for forms accepted prior to February 19, 2019.
If the claimant …
Then consider the application a claim for …
asserts a relationship between service in the armed forces and an
illness
disease, or
injury
Example:  The claimant provides dates of treatment that fall within the period of service.
compensation only.
claims to be totally disabled without indicating that this is due to service in the armed forces, and
furnishes information about
employment, and/or
income, or
has attained age 65, claims no disability, and furnishes information about
employment, and/or
income
pension only.
asserts a relationship between service in the armed forces and an
illness
disease, or
injury
claims to be totally disabled, and
furnishes information about
employment, and/or
income
compensation and pension.
completes all or a portion of
Part II of the application, which deals with service-related disabilities, and
Parts VII through X of the application, which deal with
income
net worth, and
deductible expenses
compensation and pension.
requests dental treatment only
dental treatment only and follow the procedures at M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.B.1.a.
Reference:  For more information on claims involving dental conditions only, see
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.B and C
38 CFR 17.161, and
38 U.S.C. 1712(a)(1).
 
Note:  If any doubt exists as to which benefit a claimant is seeking, ask the claimant for clarification.
Reference:  For more information on handling discontinued forms, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.4.

II.iii.1.A.2.b.  Discretionary Application of 38 CFR 3.151(a)

38 CFR 3.151(a) instructs that a claim for compensation may be accepted as a claim for Veterans Pension and vice versa.  Application of this provision of 38 CFR 3.151(a) is discretionary.  Not all claims for Veterans Pension are necessarily claims for compensation and vice versa. 
Consider the following three criteria when deciding whether VA will make the discretionary decision to apply 38 CFR 3.151(a) in the context of the Standard Claims and Appeals Forms rule.
Regardless of which claims form is submitted, the information on the claim must constitute a substantially complete claim for the unclaimed benefit being considered under 38 CFR 3.151(a).
If VA Form 21P-527EZ is accepted as a claim for compensation, the claim form must include information that would otherwise be included on a claim for compensation.
If VA Form 21-526EZ is accepted as a claim for Veterans Pension, the claim form must include information that would otherwise be included on a claim for Veterans Pension including income information.
The evidence of record must establish a likelihood that the benefit will be granted.
The claim must be reasonably interpreted to reflect an intent to claim benefits for the issue at hand.  Generally, this is reflected via the claimant listing the issue on the claim form. 
Important:  If all of the above criteria are not met, then the discretionary application of 38 CFR 3.151(a) is not warranted.  In situations where the
discretionary application of 38 CFR 3.151(a) is not warranted and the claimant has submitted an improper form for application for a benefit, follow the request for application procedures at M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.1, or
evidence shows the presence of a chronic, unclaimed disability but the claimant has not expressed an intent to claim a benefit, solicit a claim per M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2.
Note:  For DIC and Survivors Pension, the claims provisions are not discretionary.
References:  For more information on
the discretionary application of 38 CFR 3.151(a), see Stewart v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 15 (1997)
the non-discretionary application of 38 CFR 3.152(b), see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.e, and
what constitutes a substantially complete application, see 
38 CFR 3.160(a)
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.a.

II.iii.1.A.2.c.  Processing Additional Correspondence Received With a Prescribed Form

A claimant may submit additional correspondence, including but not limited to, statements and other prescribed forms, in conjunction with a prescribed form that identifies additional claimed issues.  VA may accept the additional issues as part of the claim when 
received at the same time as a substantially complete prescribed form appropriate to the benefit sought, and
intent to claim the issue(s) is explicitly or implicitly expressed, considering the context of the submission.
Follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G, when the additional correspondence requests a benefit without the appropriate prescribed form required for the benefit requested.
Important: 
Forms that require a signature must be signed, without regard to other accompanying forms bearing a signature.  
When a claimant’s signature is included on a prescribed form but a POA’s signature is on additional correspondence other than a prescribed form a POA has legal authority to sign (such as a VA Form 20-0995), do not presume that the additional issues were intended to be submitted as part of the application package.  In this situation, additional issues submitted and signed by a POA that are not on an appropriate prescribed form should be treated as a request for application.
The following do not, alone, show intent to claim an issue(s):
listing of non-service-connected (NSC) issues on a VA Form 21-8940, and/or
submissions of medical evidence, such as private or VA treatment records or disability benefits questionnaires.
Note:  When the source of additional correspondence received with a prescribed form cannot be ascertained, presume it is from the same source as the prescribed form unless there is evidence to the contrary. 
References:  For more information on
appropriate prescribed forms for the benefit sought, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a
the mere existence of medical records not constituting a claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2.b
handling NSC issues listed on a VA Form 21-8940, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.e
substantially complete applications, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f
a representative’s authority to submit claims and other claims-related documents, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A.4.b
checking for a proper signature, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.A.2.c, and
examples of situations involving additional correspondence received with a prescribed form, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.d.

II.iii.1.A.2.d.  Examples:  Situations Involving Additional Correspondence Received With a Prescribed Form

Example 1:  A Veteran submits a claim for increase for SC right elbow condition on a VA Form 21-526EZ, also listing the previously denied SC issue of migraines, explaining migraines resulted from an in-service injury.  At the same time the Veteran submits a supplemental claim for a previously denied SC right hip condition on a VA Form 20-0995, also listing SC for depression (not previously claimed) due to the SC back condition, and includes private treatment records.
Analysis:  Migraines can be accepted as a supplemental claim because the VA Form 20-0995 is the prescribed form for supplemental claims, potentially new evidence was received, and the VA Form 21-526EZ was submitted at the same time as the prescribed VA Form 20-0995.  Depression can be accepted as an initial claim for SC because the VA Form 21-526EZ is the prescribed form for initial SC, and the VA Form 20-0995 was submitted at the same time as the prescribed VA Form 21-526EZ. 
Example 2:  Same scenario as Example 1, except the Veteran also submits a VA Form 21- 10210, Lay/Witness Statement, at the same time, claiming SC for right wrist condition (not previously denied).  The Veteran also states VA previously denied SC for a left knee condition on a direct basis and requests it be considered secondary to the SC back condition.
Analysis:  The right wrist condition can be accepted as a claim for SC because the VA Form 21-526EZ is the prescribed form for initial SC and the VA Form 21-10210 was received at the same time as the VA Form 21-526EZ.  Left knee condition can be accepted as a supplemental claim because the VA Form 20-0995is the prescribed form for supplemental claims, potentially new evidence was received, and the VA Form 21-10210 was received at the same time as the VA Form 20-0995. 
Example 3:  A Veteran submits a claim for an increase for SC right and left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, and lumbosacral strain on a VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran also submits a VA Form 21-10210, at the same time as the VA Form 21-526EZ that describes the worsening of the disabilities as well as a new right hip condition caused by an altered gait related to the knee conditions.
Analysis:  The right hip condition can be accepted as a claim because the VA Form 21-526EZ is the prescribed form for initial SC disabilities and the VA Form 21-10210 was submitted at the same time as the prescribed VA Form 21-526EZ.
Example 4:  A Veteran submits an initial claim for SC for cervical spine strain on a VA Form 21-526EZ.  One day later, the Veteran submits a VA Form 21-10210 for SC for anxiety disorder.
Analysis:  VA Form 21-10210 is not the prescribed form for initial claims for SC.  Additionally, the VA Form 21-10210 was not received at the same time as the prescribed VA Form 21-526EZ.  The VA Form 21-10210 would be processed as a request for application in accordance with M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.

II.iii.1.A.2.e.  Receipt of EZ Form Requesting a Different Benefit Application

The VA Form 21-526EZ and VA Form 21P-527EZ contain instructions for the claimant to request a different benefit application.
Use the table to determine what action must be taken upon receipt of such notice.
If the VA Form …
Then send the claimant a request for application letter and attach …
21-526EZ has “Pension” written
at the top of the form, or
in the claimed disabilities section
VA Form 21P-527EZ.
21P-527EZ has “Will claim compensation – send VA Form 21-526EZ” written
at the top of the form, or
in the claimed disabilities that prevent you from working section
VA Form 21-526EZ.
Reference:  For more information on requests for applications, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G, and
38 CFR 3.155(a).

II.iii.1.A.2.f.  Considering Unclaimed Theories of SC 

Although there may be multiple theories or means of establishing entitlement to a benefit for a disability, if the theories all pertain to the same benefit for the same disability, they constitute the same claim.  A claim for SC encompasses all potential theories of SC, whether claimed or unclaimed. 
 
When a claimant has claimed SC for an issue, the evidence of record must be reviewed to determine the scope of that claim.  All claims must be liberally read to consider other potential theories of SC. 
 
Although VA is obligated to determine all potential claims raised by the evidence, theories of SC which have no support in the record need not be further developed or specifically addressed in a rating decision.  However, a denial of SC is a denial for all potential theories, whether specifically addressed in the rating or not.
 
To determine whether an unclaimed theory of SC is reasonably raised by the record, consider factors or evidence such as 
circumstances of service
type of disability for which the claimant seeks benefits, and
any evidence of record. 
Example:  A Veteran claims SC for multiple myeloma on a direct basis.  The evidence of record does not support the direct theory.  However, the evidence does show that the Veteran served in Vietnam.  As multiple myeloma is defined in 38 CFR 3.309(e) as a condition presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide, the theory of presumptive SC is reasonably raised by the evidence and considered within the scope of the claim.
 
Exception:  The requirement to liberally read claims based on multiple theories does not extend to claims of CUE, as the burden is on the claimant to specifically raise each issue.  Each new CUE theory is independent. 
 
References:  For more information on considering
CUE claims, see
Andrews v. Nicholson, 421 F.3d 1278 (Fed. Cir. 2005)
Robinson v. Shinseki, 22 Vet.App. 440 (2009), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A
multiple theories of SC, see
Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet.App. 545 (2008)
Bingham v. Principi, 18 Vet.App. 470 (2004), and
Roebuck v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 307, 313 (2006), and
a new theory of SC in a supplemental claim, see 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.b, and
38 CFR 3.2501(a)(1).

3.  Application Guidance for Specific Types of Claims
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on handling applications for specific types of claims, including
reviewing VA Form 21-2680
to identify claims for SMC or SMP, and
for claims for spousal or survivors’ A&A or housebound benefits 
issues that arise from consideration of VA Forms 21-2680, 21-4502, or 26-4555, Application in Acquiring Specially Adapted Housing or Special Home Adaptation Grant
handling requests for P&T status for compensation, and
non-discretionary application of 38 CFR 3.152(b).

Change Date

September 11, 2025

II.iii.1.A.3.a.  Reviewing VA Form 21-2680 to Identify Claims for SMC or SMP
 

VA Form 21-2680, can be used as a standalone form if the claimant and/or the supporting documentation identifies whether the benefit sought is SMP (only when there is a running pension award) or SMC.  Revisions to the form (effective September 2018) allow the claimant to identify the benefit sought.  
 
The identification of the benefit sought can be
specific, with the Veteran identifying on the form whether the claim is for SMC or SMP, or
based on sympathetic reading of the claim via reviewing the issues raised on VA Form 21-2680 in the context of the benefits the Veteran is receiving. 
When VA Form 21-2680 is submitted, the Veteran is identified as the claimant, and the benefit sought is
not identified, determine the benefit sought and next action by applying the principles in the table below, or
identified, and is a claim for
SMC
if a prior original claim for compensation is of record (whether granted or denied), accept the claim for SMC and issue a decision based on the evidence of record, or
if no prior original claim for compensation is of record, consider the VA Form 21-2680 a request for application, and/or
if the evidence of record suggests that pension with SMP may be payable as a greater benefit, then alsoapply the principles in the table below that correspond with the SMP claim and the Veteran’s benefit status to determine the appropriate next action to take.
SMP, apply the principles in the table below that correspond with the SMP claim and the Veteran’s benefit status to determine the appropriate next action to take.
Note:  Although VA Form 21-2680 may be accepted as a prescribed claim form for SMC or SMP, it is not required to grant entitlement to either benefit.  Do not undertake routine development for completion of this form when deciding a claim for SMC or SMP.  For more information on use of VA Form 21-2680, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.1.i.
Use the table below to determine the benefits being sought by reviewing the Veteran's benefit status and VA Form 21-2680.
If ...
Then accept the VA Form 21-2680 as ...
the Veteran is
receiving compensation
entitled to receive compensation but has elected to receive military retired pay, or
submitting any initial claim for compensation
a claim for SMC regardless of the conditions listed on the VA Form 21-2680.
 
Exception:  If the evidence of record suggests that pension with SMP may be payable as a greater benefit if claimed, then also accept the VA Form 21-2680 as a request for application for pension with SMP.
the Veteran is
receiving pension, or
submitting any initial claim for pension
a claim for SMP regardless of the conditions listed on VA Form 21-2680.
dual entitlement exists
a claim for
SMC if the Veteran is in receipt of compensation, or
SMP if in receipt of pension. 
Important:  In addition to accepting the VA Form 21-2680 as a claim for SMC or SMP based on the benefit currently being received (as directed above), also accept the VA Form 21-2680 as a
claim for the opposite benefit (the benefit the Veteran is not currently in receipt of) only ifthe opposite benefit can be granted and the grant results in a greater benefit to the Veteran, or
request for application if the Veteran is currently receiving compensation and the evidence suggests that pension may be the greater benefit but no income information is of record.
has not submitted a prior or current original claim for compensation or pension
a request for application.
 
Reference:  For more information on handling a request for application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.
the Veteran is not in receipt of, entitled to receive, or currently claiming VA compensation or pension benefits, and
has previously submitted an original claim for either pension or compensation which has been denied
a request for application.
 
Note:  When a Veteran is SC with a 0-percent combined disability evaluation, accept the VA Form 21-2680 as a request for application since the Veteran is not in receipt of monetary compensation. 
 
Reference:  For more information on handling a request for application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.
a prior claim for SMC or SMP has been denied, and
VA Form 20-0995 is submitted with VA Form 21-2680 (identifying the SMC/SMP issue)
a supplemental claim.
 
Notes: 
Submission of VA Form 21-2680 is not required for the supplemental claim.
When a prior claim for SMC or SMP has been denied but VA Form 21-2680 is not accompanied by VA Form 20-0995, then accept the submission of VA Form 21-2680 as an initial claim for
SMC, or
SMP only if there is a running award or pending pension claim, and
follow the applicable procedure based on corresponding claim status or benefit entitlement as directed in the remaining guidance in this table.
the Veteran is already in receipt of A&A for compensation
a request for application.
 
Reference:  For more information on handling a request for application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.
the Veteran is already in receipt of A&A for pension
a duplicate request for SMP, unless following the above procedures within this table allows for acceptance of the VA Form 21-2680 as a claim for SMC.
 
Note:  If the claim is accepted as a duplicate request for SMP, provide notice that the claimed benefit has previously been awarded. 
 
Reminder:  When accepting VA Form 21-2680 as a claim for SMC or SMP, the form is a potential claim for both A&A and housebound benefits.
A grant of A&A renders the issue of housebound moot for the same type of benefit (either SMC or SMP) since A&A is the greater benefit.  The issue of entitlement to SMC or SMP based on housebound status need not be addressed when A&A is granted for the same type of benefit (SMC or SMP).
VA Form 21-2680 is a claim for both A&A and housebound benefits.  If A&A is denied, the rating decision must address the issue of housebound status.  If, however, housebound has been previously granted, the issue of entitlement to housebound need not be readdressed and/or continued in the rating decision. 
References:  For more information on 
reviewing VA Form 21-2680 for claims for spousal A&A, surviving spouse’s A&A or housebound benefits, or parent’s A&A, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.b
signature requirements when accepting VA Form 21-2680 as a claim for SMC or SMP, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.e
considering competency information included on VA Form 21-2680, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.A.2.b, and
procedures for addressing A&A or housebound status as an unclaimed issue within scope of another claimed issue, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.b, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.8.h.

II.iii.1.A.3.b.Reviewing VA Form 21-2680 for Claims for Spousal or Survivors’ A&A or Housebound Benefits

VA Form 21-2680 can be used as a standalone form to claim spousal or survivors’ A&A or housebound benefits when there is an active claim and/or running DIC or Survivors Pension award and the benefit sought is adequately identified.  Revisions to the form (effective September 2018) allow the claimant to identify the benefit sought.  
The identification of the benefit sought can be
specific, with the claimant identifying which benefit is being claimed, or
based on sympathetic reading of the claim such as
identifying the dependent as the claimant or the individual being examined on the VA Form 21-2680, and
considering the information on the form in the context of the VA benefits being paid based on the Veteran’s service. 
Use the table below when a Veteran’s spouse, surviving spouse, or parent is identified as the claimant or the individual being examined on VA Form 21-2680.
When ...
Then accept the VA Form 21-2680 as a claim for ...
a Veteran is in receipt of, entitled to receive, or claiming compensation, and
the spouse is identified as the individual being examined on the form
spousal A&A.
a surviving spouse is receiving DIC or Survivors Pension, and
the spouse is identified as the individual being examined on the form
surviving spouse’s A&A and housebound benefits.
a Veteran’s parent is receiving parent’s DIC, and
the parent is identified as the individual being examined on the form
A&A for the parent.
Reference:  For more information on handling claims for spousal A&A when the combined evaluation of the Veteran’s SC conditions is less than 30 percent, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.A.4.c.

II.iii.1.A.3.c.Issues That Arise From Consideration of VA Forms 21-2680, 21-4502, or 26-4555

VA Forms 21-2680, 21-4502, and 26-4555 are not specific claims for increased evaluation of an SC disability.  However, the issue of increased evaluation can be considered within the scope of the claim for SMC, auto, or adapted housing benefits and should be addressed in the rating decision when evidence on the form or in
the evidence associated with the claim indicates the presence of a disability that is within the scope of an SC disability (such as a complication of diabetes), or
other lay or medical evidence associated with the claim indicates the SC disability may have worsened.  
Important:  If the medical evidence is insufficient to evaluate the disability, request examination of the condition as a part of the claim for SMC, auto, or adapted housing benefits.  Do not routinely request examinations without first assessing the medical evidence for sufficiency.  Only address the condition in the rating decision when examination or other medical evidence confirms a change in the disability evaluation of the SC issue is warranted or confirms the presence of the condition that is within the scope of another SC condition.
References:  For more information on 
conducting dependency development during the initial development phase when a claim for spousal A&A is received but the spouse is not on the Veteran’s award, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.A.5.b, and
within scope determinations, see
38 CFR 3.155(d), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.

II.iii.1.A.3.d.  Handling Requests for P&T Status for Compensation

Veterans may submit a specific request for P&T status related to receipt of compensation benefits.  
A request for P&T status must
be received on a prescribed form for SC or increased evaluation, and
specify the SC issue or issues that are associated with the claimed P&T status.
Handle requests for P&T status that do not identify the associated issue(s) as incomplete applications except when only one SC disability exists.  When a single SC disability exists, presume that the claim for P&T status is associated with the single SC disability. 
A request for P&T status for compensation purposes is inherently tied to an underlying claim for SC or increased evaluation.  Thus, development of the underlying claim satisfies any development need associated with the request for P&T status.
Note:  Requests for P&T status may be routinely addressed as entitlement to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) in the rating decision.
 
References:  For more information on
considering P&T status associated with pension, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 2.2
handling incomplete applications, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C
the definition of
permanent disability, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4.b, and
total disability, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4.a
the relationship between P&T disability and entitlement to DEA, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 1.A.1, and
commissary and exchange privileges associated with P&T disability, see M27-1, Part I, 5.05.g.

II.iii.1.A.3.e.  Non- Discretionary Application of 38 CFR 3.152(b) 

38 CFR 3.152(b) provides that a survivor's claim for
DIC will also be considered a claim for Survivors Pension and accrued benefits, and
Survivors Pension will also be considered a claim for DIC and accrued benefits.
VA has no discretion in this matter.  
 
Use the table below to determine which benefits VA must address depending on the form the claimant submits.
If ...
Then VA is obligated to address the claimant’s entitlement to ...
a surviving parent submits VA Form 21P-535
DIC, and
accrued benefits.
a surviving spouse or child submits VA Form 21P-534EZ
DIC
Survivors Pension, and
accrued benefits.
Note:  If the application is received from an adult child that does not meet the exception in M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.B.1.a, process the accrued portion as a request for application and send the claimant the correct form to apply for accrued benefits (VA Form 21P-601).
Note:  When a claimant does not indicate which benefit is sought or only checks accrued on the original application, the proper end product (EP) is 140.  When a claimant is clearly only applying for pension the proper EP is 190.  Change the EP to 140 if it later becomes clear that 
the survivor is claiming DIC, or
there is a reasonable possibility that the Veteran's death is SC and a rating decision is required.
References:  For more information on
the non-discretionary nature of survivors' claims, see 38 U.S.C. 5101(b), and
survivors' claims procedures, see M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 1.B.

                                 
 4.  Reviewing Application Completeness and Handling Variances
  

Introduction

This topic contains miscellaneous information on claims for VA benefits, including
what constitutes a substantially complete application
when to place an application for benefits under EP control
determining the proper date of claim (DOC) for claims establishment purposes
identifying an incomplete application
handling an unsigned application for benefits
requests for benefits that are not filed on a prescribed form, and
furnishing applications to claimants.

Change Date

April 14, 2021

II.iii.1.A.4.a.    What Constitutes a Substantially Complete Application

VA has a duty to assist claimants who file a substantially complete application for benefits.  The criteria for a substantially complete application are found in 38 CFR 3.160(a) and M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f.
References:  For more information on
notification requirements for complete and incomplete applications, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C, and
VA’s duty to assist with requesting records, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C. 

II.iii.1.A.4.b.When to Place an Application for Benefits Under EP Control

Do not establish EP control for an application for benefits unless it is substantially complete. 
References:  For more information on
criteria for a substantially complete application, see 
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3)
38 CFR 3.160(a), and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f, and
notification requirements for an incomplete application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C. 

II.iii.1.A.4.c.  Determining the Proper DOC for Claims Establishment Purposes

The date of claim (DOC) for claims establishment purposes is the earliest date anyVA facility received the claim.
Important:  Pension and burial claims electronically submitted via VA.gov use the actual date of VA receipt of the application and not the Centralized Mail time stamp.  Applications submitted via VA.gov will have a submission number and text of Submitted Electronically in the upper left corner of every page.
Example Scenario:
A VA medical center (VAMC) receives the application on October 14, 2006.
The VAMC forwards the application to the regional office (RO) on November 1, 2006.
The RO does not receive the application in its mailroom until November 5, 2006.
Result:  When the RO places the claim under EP control, it must use October 14, 2006, as the DOC.

II.iii.1.A.4.d.  Identifying an Incomplete Application 

Consider an application incomplete if it is signed but the claimant has not provided all the information described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.
 
Reference:  For more information on the criteria for a substantially complete application, see 38 CFR 3.160(a) and 38 CFR 3.159(a)(3). 

II.iii.1.A.4.e.Handling an Unsigned Application for Benefits
 

A lack of signature from the claimant or other legally authorized individual renders an application incomplete for
original claims received prior to March 24, 2015, and
all claims received on or after March 24, 2015.
Upon receipt of an unsigned application for benefits, follow the procedures for handling incomplete applications included at M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C. 
Exception:  No claimant signature is required when
VA Form 21-2680 is accepted as a prescribed form for a claim for SMC or SMP
VA Form 21-0779 is accepted as a prescribed form for a claim for A&A (nursing home patients only), or
VA Form 21P-0969 is accepted as a statement in support of a pending claim for pension or Parents’ DIC.
Important:  The application must be signed by the claimant or other legally authorized individual somewhere on the application itself.  The submission of an unsigned application with other signed forms is not sufficient to satisfy the requirement for a signed application.
 
References:  For more information on
handling incomplete applications, see
38 CFR 3.155(c), and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C
policies and procedures for acceptance of claimant signatures, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.2 and 3
checking for the proper signature, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.A.2.c
situations in which signatures are not required on supplemental claims submitted by POAs through the Stakeholder Enterprise Portal, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 4.B.2.g and h
the procedures for processing claims received through Veterans Online Application Direct Connect, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 4.A and B, and
procedures for waiving signature requirements for documents submitted electronically through a VA claims-submission service website, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.A.2.c.

II.iii.1.A.4.f.  Requests for Benefits That Are Not Filed on a Prescribed Form

Use the table below to determine whether a request for benefits that is not filed on a prescribed form is considered an informal claim or a request for application.
If received …
And …
Then process the submission as …
prior to March 24, 2015
the submission represents the original claim for benefits
an informal claim.

VA previously processed an original claim for benefits
a claim and
establish EP control, and
initiate development of the claim.
on or after March 24, 2015
N/A
a request for application.
 
References:  For more information on
requirements for a formal application received prior to March 24, 2015, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.2
requirements for a complete claim received on or after March 24, 2015, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a
informal claims received prior to March 24, 2015, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.1
requests for application, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.1, and
38 CFR 3.155(a)
furnishing applications, see 
38 CFR 3.150, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.g, and
handling outdated or discontinued forms, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.4.

II.iii.1.A.4.g.  Furnishing Applications to Claimants

VA has an obligation under 38 CFR 3.150 to provide an application for benefits to anyone who requests one.
 
Before furnishing an application to a claimant in person, enter the Veteran’s name and file number in the appropriate spaces on the form.
 
Rationale:  When the claimant eventually returns the application to VA, it will be easier and faster to
identify the Veteran on whom the claim is based, and
associate the application with the proper claims folder.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section B - Screening Applications for Benefit Eligibility
Article ID: 554400000174870
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section   Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the topic "Benefit-Specific Eligibility Factors."

 
 
1.  Benefit-Specific Eligibility Factors
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on benefit-specific eligibility factors, including
screening an original application for basic eligibility
requirement for Social Security numbers (SSNs)
eligibility determinations for
compensation
pension
survivors benefits, and
related benefits, and
eligibility for Chapter 18 benefits.

Change Date

March 22, 2024

II.iii.1.B.1.a.  Screening an Original Application for Basic Eligibility

In reviewing and processing an original application for Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, a claims processor must determine if the claimant meets the eligibility criteria for the specific benefits only after
Veteran status has been established
service has been verified, and
character of discharge (COD) has been found to be other than dishonorable.
Note:  In order to verify service, review active duty dates and verify COD by
reviewing the discharge document
obtaining verification by the service department, or
obtaining a VA administrative decision, when necessary.
Exception:  If the claims processor determines that a claimant does not meet one or more eligibility factors for a benefit, the claim can be denied without verifying service.  In these cases, the decision notice must fully inform the claimant of VA’s action, informing them, if appropriate, that Veteran status has not been established.
Reference:  For more information on providing a decision notice, see
38 CFR 3.103(f), and
M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.B.

II.iii.1.B.1.b.  Requirement for SSNs

Any person who applies for a VA compensation or pension benefit must disclose their Social Security number (SSN) and the SSNs of their dependents.  However, an SSN is not required for any person to whom no SSN has been assigned. 
 
Notes: 
If there is no evidence to the contrary, accept a claimant’s (or fiduciary’s) certified statement that no SSN has been assigned.
A claimant may provide the SSN over the telephone.  However, do not accept a certified statement that no SSN has been assigned orally; a signature is required.  The claimant may submit the certified statement electronically through a VA claims submission service website, in person, or by mail.
References:  For more information on
the mandatory disclosure of SSNs, see 38 CFR 3.216, and
development procedures for SSNs, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.A.7.

II.iii.1.B.1.c.  Eligibility Determinations for Compensation

If a claim is submitted for service-connected (SC) disability compensation and honorable active service is verified, compensation entitlement is determined by the rating activity.
 
When a rating decision is completed, the decision indicates whether a Veteran is entitled to compensation and, if so, to what degree.  In addition, the rating decision may include entitlement to special monthly compensation and any related benefits.

II.iii.1.B.1.d.  Eligibility Determinations for Pension

Wartime service for pension is established if a Veteran served
at least 90 days of active duty during a period of war
at least 90 consecutive days of active duty and such period began or ended during a period of war
a total of 90 or more days of active duty during one or more wartime periods, or
any amount of time during a period of war and
was discharged for a disability incurred or aggravated in service, or
had an SC disability at the time of discharge that would have justified a discharge for disability.
Important:  Veterans entering service after September 7, 1980, must also meet the minimum active duty requirement of 24 months of continuous service or the full period to which the Veteran was called to active duty, as provided in 38 U.S.C. 5303A and 38 CFR 3.12a.  The minimum active duty period must include at least one day of wartime service.
 
Note:  In addition to meeting the wartime service and minimum active duty requirements, entitlement to pension payments based on disability and income must be determined as outlined in
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 1.1
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 1.A, and
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 1.A.
References:  For more information on
SC disabilities at the time of discharge and entitlement to pension, see 38 CFR 3.3
pension wartime service requirement, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 1.2.a, and
active duty service requirements, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.B.1.

II.iii.1.B.1.e.  Eligibility Determinations for Survivors Benefits

Based on the individual who files the claim for survivors benefits, consider the factors listed in the table below.
If …
Then …
the claimant is a surviving spouse or child who has filed for Survivors Pension
the Veteran’s service must meet the basic eligibility criteria of M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.B.1.d for pension.
the claimant is a surviving spouse, child, or parent who has filed for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC)
refer the claim to the rating activity for a determination.
 
Note:  If death occurred in service, see M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 1.C.1.b to determine if a rating decision is necessary.
 
Exception:  If a parent(s) income is excessive for DIC, deny the claim without referral to the rating activity.
the claimant is a surviving spouse, child or parent who has filed for Survivors Pension or DIC
the claimant’s relationship to the Veteran must be established.
 
Reference:  For more information on relationship, see 38 CFR 3.50 through 38 CFR 3.60.
the claim is for a burial or plot allowance
the specific requirements of 38 CFR 3.1700 must be met.


II.iii.1.B.1.f.  Eligibility Determinations for Related Benefits

Use the table below when making eligibility determinations regarding related benefits.
Type of Related Benefit 
Eligibility Requirements 
automobile or other conveyance allowance 
Requires SC disability or a disability incurred due to treatment under 38 U.S.C. 1151, which results in
loss, or permanent loss of use, of
one or both feet, or
one or both hands
permanent impairment of vision of both eyes to a prescribed degree
a severe burn injury defined as disability caused by deep partial thickness or full thickness burns resulting in scar formation that causes contractures and limits motion in one or more extremities or the trunk and precludes effective operation of an automobile, or
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Reference:  For more information on payment and eligibility for automobile allowance, see
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.A, and
38 CFR 3.808.
specially adapted housing and special home adaptation grants
Requires SC disability or a disability incurred due to treatment under 38 U.S.C. 1151, that results in prescribed limitations.
 
Reference:  For more information on eligibility factors, see
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.B.1, and
38 CFR 3.809a.
Restored Entitlement Program for Survivors (REPS) (Special allowance under Public Law 97-377, Section 156)
Requires a formal determination concerning the Veteran’s death and disability.
 
Reference:  For more information on REPS, see
38 CFR 3.812, and
M21-1, Part XII, Subpart ii, 3.A.
vocational rehabilitation/employment services
38 U.S.C. Chapter 31 requires
a combined SC disability evaluation of at least 20 percent, and
an evaluation and determination of entitlement by the Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) Division, or
a combined SC disability evaluation of 10 percent with a VR&E finding of a serious employment handicap.
Reference:  For more information on VR&E benefits, see
M28-1, and
38 CFR Part 21.
Dependents Educational Assistance (DEA)
38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 requires 
permanent and total SC disability (This means either a combined evaluation of 100 percent or a total rating due to individual unemployability, both with no future examination.)
SC death, or
permanent and total SC disability at the time of death.
Note:  Generally, a dependent must be established for benefit purposes and a child must have completed high school or be beyond the compulsory age for school attendance.
 
Reference:  For more information on DEA, see
M22-4, Part 7
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 1.A, and
38 CFR Part 21, Subpart C.


II.iii.1.B.1.g.  Eligibility for Chapter 18 Benefits

38 U.S.C. Chapter 18 benefits are not dependent on the COD.  That is, regardless of the characterization of the service of the Veteran parent, individuals may receive Chapter 18 benefits if the necessary service and relationship requirements are met.  
 
Reference:  For more information on Chapter 18 benefits, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 3.

M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section C - Screening Applications for Substantial Completeness and Notification Requirements
Article ID: 554400000174872
Updated Sep 11, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Screening Applications for Substantial Completeness 
2
Notification Requirements for Complete and Incomplete Claims 


  
 1.  Screening Applications for Substantial Completeness
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on screening applications for substantial completeness, including
required notice of information needed to complete an application
determining if a claim is complete or incomplete
considerations when a statement of income is required, and
determining the action to take when a claim is substantially complete or incomplete.

Change Date

September 11, 2025

II.iii.1.C.1.a.  Required Notice of Information Needed to Complete an Application

Under 38 U.S.C. 5102, if an application for a benefit is incomplete, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is required to notify the claimant and the claimant’s representative, if applicable, of the information necessary to complete the application.  
 
Reference:  For more information on sending notice of an incomplete application, see
38 CFR 3.159(b)(2), and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b.

II.iii.1.C.1.b.  Determining if a Claim Is Complete or Incomplete 

An application is considered incomplete if it is not substantially complete.  A substantially complete application is defined in M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f.
 
Notes:  
Beginning March 24, 2015, unless specifically excluded under M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.b, all claims governed by VA’s adjudication regulations must be filed on standard forms prescribed by the Secretary, regardless of the type of claim or posture in which the claim arises.  Statements received without a prescribed form on or after March 24, 2015, will be considered a request for application.
A claim for an increased evaluation of a service-connected disability based on a statement from the claimant that the disability has worsened constitutes a substantially complete application, if received prior to March 24, 2015.
References:  For more information on
complete claims, see
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3), and
38 CFR 3.160(a)
prescribed forms for claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a
when VA will consider a form complete with blank fields, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.A.2
signature requirements, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.2, and
requests for application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.1.

II.iii.1.C.1.c.  Considerations When a Statement of Income Is Required

A statement of income is required for all pension claims.  To satisfy this requirement, at least one entry in the income section of the form is required.
 
If no statement of income is provided, contact the claimant by telephone, documenting the call on a VA Form 27-0820, Report of General Information, to obtain a statement of income.  If no statement is obtained, return the application as incomplete in accordance with M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b.
  
If a statement of income is provided and the claim is at least substantially complete, the claim is accepted and processed.  At this point, the claim may be 
granted, if warranted, 
denied under 38 CFR 3.159(d), or 
developed.
Exceptions:  
Some survivor claims may need development when no income and/or net worth information is provided.  VA Form 21P-534EZ, Application for DIC, Survivors Pension, and/or Accrued Benefits, is a claim for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC), pension, and accrued benefits.  The income and net worth section of this form does not always need to be complete for the application to be considered substantially complete. 
In pension, claimants are required to report dependents and dependents’ income and net worth.  If a dependent is claimed and no income and/or net worth information is provided for the dependent, develop for the dependent’s income and net worth information.
References:  For more information on development for
income and/or net worth information on a survivors benefit application, see M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 1.B.1.c
specific types of income, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 3.B.3.a, and
dependents and dependents' income and net worth when processing claims for pension, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.A.1.f.

II.iii.1.C.1.d.  Determining the Action to Take When a Claim Is Substantially Complete or Incomplete 

After determining whether an application is substantially complete or incomplete, refer to the table below to determine the appropriate action(s) to take.
If the application is …
Then …
at least substantially complete 
determine whether Section 5103 notice has been provided or whether a Section 5103 notice letter must be sent under the guidance in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B. 
incomplete 
notify the claimant and claimant’s representative, if applicable, of the information necessary to complete the prescribed application form as described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b, and
review the INTENT TO FILE screen in the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) to determine if correction of the status of an intent to file (ITF) is needed due to the receipt of the application erroneously updating an ITF status to Claim Received.
Important:  
When the status of an ITF requires correction, submit a ticket in the YourIT Service Portal and include
the information currently displayed on the INTENT TO FILE screen in VBMS, with attached screenshots, and
a summary of the correction needed (e.g., Change status of ITF from “claim received,” to “active,” as the VA Form 21P-534EZ was not substantially complete).  
Do not send a Section 5103 notice. 
Reference:  For more information on viewing ITF information in VBMS, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.d and e, and
the VBMS Core User Guide.  


  
2.  Notification Requirements Based on Screening  

Introduction

This topic contains information about providing notification requirements for
a complete application
an incomplete application
an incomplete application based on 
exposure allegation, and
experiencing military sexual trauma (MST)
a request for application or an ITF, and
claims that are inherently incredible or lack merit.

Change Date

July 14, 2025

II.iii.1.C.2.a.  Notification Requirements for a Complete Application
 
If an application is complete, the claims processor must check whether the claimant has already received 38 U.S.C. 5103 notification regarding the information and evidence that is necessary to substantiate the claim, when the notice is required.  
Reference:  For more information on VA’s notification requirements, see 
38 U.S.C. 5103
38 CFR 3.159(b)(1), and
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B.

II.iii.1.C.2.b.  Notification Requirements for an Incomplete Application

When an incomplete application is received, notify the claimant that a complete application is necessary.  Follow the steps in the table below to notify the claimant of the information necessary to complete the claim.
 
Step
Action
1
Whenever possible, contact the claimant or power of attorney first by telephone to obtain the information needed to complete the application.
 
Reference:  For more information on documenting information received by telephone, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.e.
2
If the information necessary to complete the application cannot be obtained by telephone
establish an end product (EP) 400 to control the correspondence, or
change the erroneously established EP to an EP 400
with an Incomplete Application claim label, and
use the date the application was received as the control date.
Note:  An EP 030 or EP 040 should not be cleared or changed to another EP.  In these cases, cancel the erroneously established EP and separately establish the EP 400 per the instructions above.
3
Cancel any other erroneously established EP associated with the incomplete claim, and/or
remove any contention(s) erroneously added to a valid EP (if applicable).
4
Notate the incomplete application in the claims folder by changing the document’s subject to Incomplete Application.
5
Prepare and send the Incomplete Application letter.  The notice must include
the application form that is being returned as incomplete as an enclosure to the letter
the information VA needs to consider the application complete, including the specific section(s) and question number(s) that require completion
a statement that failure to submit a substantially complete application within the required time period will result in no benefit being paid or furnished by reason of that application, and
notice that the claimant has
60 days from the date of the notice to submit a substantially complete supplemental claim or request for higher-level review (HLR), or
one year from the date the incomplete application was received to submit a substantially complete claim for other types of claims.
Add the letter to the claims folder.
Important:  Include the following free text in the Incomplete Application letter if development was erroneously initiated on issues identified on the incomplete application:
“Please disregard our prior correspondence regarding these issues. In order for us to adjudicate your request for benefits, you must submit a complete application. We apologize for any confusion this may have caused.”
6
Clear the EP 400.
 
Notes:  
If a complete claim is submitted within the required time period from the date of receipt of an incomplete application, 
consider the complete application filed as of the date the incomplete application form was received, but
use the date of receipt of the complete claim as the date of claim.
If review of an incomplete application reveals that additional evidence exists that could be relevant to the corresponding claim, simultaneously ask the claimant to provide both the additional evidence and the information that is missing from the application. 
References:  For more information on
time limits to respond to a notice of an incomplete claim, see 38 CFR 3.155
determining if a dependency claim is substantially complete, see M21-1, Part VII, Subpart i, 1.A
the criteria for a substantially complete application, see 
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3), and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.1.b
handling incomplete applications based on 
allegations of exposure only, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.c, and
military sexual trauma (MST) without a claimed disability, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.d, and
claimant requirements for submitting information in pension claims, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart i, 3.B.4.a.

II.iii.1.C.2.c.  Notification Requirements for an Incomplete Application Based on Exposure Allegation

An allegation of exposure to a potentially hazardous substance during service without an associated claim for service connection (SC) for a specific disability resulting from the exposure is not a substantially complete claim.  In these cases, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b.  In the notification letter, also 
inform the Veteran that exposure, in and of itself, is not a disability, and
ask the Veteran to identify the disability(ies) that resulted from exposure during service.
Important:  Do not
process the claim as a denial, or
establish EP control for the incomplete claim unless there are other complete claims also submitted.
Reference:  For more information on handling claims for disability arising from toxic exposures, see M21-1, Part VIII.

II.iii.1.C.2.d.  Notification Requirements for an Incomplete Application Based on Experiencing MST

An allegation of experiencing MST during service without an associated claim for SC for a specific disability resulting from the trauma experience is not a substantially complete claim.  Use the table below to determine what action(s) to take when MST is identified without a disability that resulted from the trauma experience.
 
If ...
Then ...
MST is the only issue identified with no resulting disability specified
follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b.  However, do not contact the Veteran by telephone.  In the notification letter, also
inform the Veteran that MST in and of itself is not a disability
ask the Veteran to identify the disability(ies) that resulted from experiencing MST during service, and
include the language from M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.B.2.e.
Important:  Do not
contact the Veteran by telephone to clarify the disability(ies) that resulted from experiencing MST (in compliance with trauma informed practices)
process the claim as a denial, or
establish EP control for the incomplete claim unless there are other complete claims also submitted.
an allegation of MST is identified with no resulting disability specified, and
a disability(ies) is claimed on or with the prescribed form
 
 
 
add the MST special issue to a claimed disability to allow the claim to be routed for review by an MST claims processor, and
do not
list MST as a contention, or
take the actions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b.
Example:  The Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, claiming SC for left knee injury and also listed MST with no resulting disability.
 
Result:
Add left knee injury as a contention
affix the MST special issue to the left knee contention, and
do not
enter MST as a contention, or
take the actions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b.
Note:  For the purpose of routing the claim for review by an MST claims processor in accordance with the procedures in this table, affix the MST special issue to only one contention when multiple disabilities are claimed.
 
Note:  When a claim is routed to an MST claims processor for review, as described in the table above, the MST claims processor will
review the claim and all associated evidence to determine which of the specifically claimed disabilities are potentially related to the experience of MST
develop the claim accordingly, following standard personal trauma development procedures, and
adjust assignment of the MST special issue indicator to the appropriate contention(s), as necessary.
If, at any time during the claims process, it is determined that the Veteran did notintend to claim any of the specifically identified disabilities as related to MST, then the MST claims processor will follow the instructions in the table above to notify the Veteran of the incomplete application and ask for the specific disability(ies) that resulted from MST.
 
References:  For more information on
claims for disability arising from MST, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.B and E
assigning claim attributes to claims based on personal trauma, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.B.1.c, and
processing additional correspondence received with a prescribed form, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.c.

II.iii.1.C.2.e. Notification Requirements for a Request for Application or an ITF

Effective March 24, 2015, VA requires all claims to be filed on a standard form.  Therefore, VA must provide the prescribed application forms to the claimant when the claimant
submits a request for application or desire for benefits either in writing or through electronic communications that is not on the required standard claim form, or
files an ITF by the means outlined in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.a.
Note:  After the ITF has been entered into the corporate database, a one-time correspondence is automatically generated and sent to the claimant the following day.
  
References:  For more information on
furnishing applications to claimants, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.g
handling an ITF, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A
reviewing application completeness and handling variances, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4, and
the letter generated by Hines acknowledging receipt of a communication of an ITF that includes all required elements, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.l.

II.iii.1.C.2.f.  Notification Requirements for Claims That Are Inherently Incredible or Lack Merit

Upon identification of a compensation claim that is inherently incredible or clearly lacks merit
ensure the claimant received a Section 5103 notice, and
defer assistance, including scheduling an examination, until that evidence is received. 
If the evidence requested is not received within 30 days, decide the claim based upon all available evidence.
  
Note:  No notice is required beyond the Section 5103 notice for claims that are inherently incredible or clearly lack merit.
  
Reference:  For the definition of claims that are inherently incredible or lack merit, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.c.


M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section A - Intent to File (ITF)
Article ID: 554400000174873
Updated Jul 14, 2025

< -- Previous Section  Next Section --> 
Overview  ﻿﻿
 

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name﻿﻿﻿﻿
1
General Information on ITF 
2
Systems Processing of ITFs
3
Incomplete ITFs
4
ITF Data Accuracy


 
1.  General Information on ITF    

Introduction

This topic contains information regarding the identification and processing of ITFs, including
communication of an ITF
required elements of a communication of an ITF
why communication of an ITF is important
determining active status of an ITF
identification of the benefit sought on the ITF
ITFs for multiple benefits
duplicate ITFs
applying an ITF to multiple claims received on the same day
ITFs and withdrawn claims
ITFs submitted during active duty
examples of benefits ITF does not affect, and
acknowledging receipt of a communication of an ITF that includes all required elements.

Change Date

June 14, 2023

II.iii.2.A.1.a.  Communication of an ITF

The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) stopped accepting informal claims on March 24, 2015.  Claimants desiring the benefit of filing an informal claim (as expressed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.1.b) must now communicate to VA an “intent to file” a claim.  They may accomplish this by
submitting a completed VA Form 21-0966, Intent to File a Claim for Compensation and/or Pension, or Survivors Pension and/or DIC
contacting a national call center at 1-800-827-1000
initiating an application for benefits via a VA claims submission service website, or
contacting a regional office (RO) employee by telephone or in person. 
Note:  If a claimant expresses an intent to file (ITF) before March 24, 2015, determine whether VA may accept the communication as an informal claim.
 
References:  For more information on
informal claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.1, and
VA claims submission service websites, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 4.A and B.

II.iii.2.A.1.b.  Required Elements of a Communication of an ITF

A claimant’s communication of an ITF is adequate for VA purposes if, in the communication, the claimant
provides VA with enough information to identify the Veteran (and the claimant, if the claimant is not the Veteran), and
specifies the general benefit sought (compensation and/or pension, or Survivors Pension and/or Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC)). 
Notes:
The initiation of an application for benefits via a VA claims submission service website constitutes an acceptable communication of an ITF.
When an ITF is submitted in writing, it must be submitted on VA Form 21-0966, which must be signed by
the claimant
the claimant’s Veterans service organization (VSO)
a VA-recognized power of attorney (POA), or
an alternate signer if submitted with VA Form 21-0972, Alternate Signer Certification.
As long as VA can identify the claimant via information included on VA Form 21-0966 or other information submitted with the form, the only sections of VA Form 21-0966 a claimant must complete are the sections gathering information on the type of benefit elected and the signature of the claimant or authorized representative.  Assume the claimant is the Veteran if the Claimant/Veteran Identification section of the form is blank.
If a claimant communicates their ITF by contacting a VA call center, and the claimant does not have a corporate record, a call center employee must complete, sign, and submit VA Form 21-0966 on the claimant's behalf. 
A claimant may communicate their ITF to a Field Examiner as directed in FPM, Part I, 2.C.3.o.
References:  For more information on 
handling a form or application with an alternate signature, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.3.c
POAs, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.A, and
procedures for handling outdated versions of forms, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.4.

II.iii.2.A.1.c.  Why Communication of an ITF Is Important

The communication of an ITF to VA is important because VA may potentially grant entitlement to benefits prior to the date of claim (DOC) if the claimant submits a complete claim within one year of the date VA received the ITF and all other necessary criteria are met. 
 
When the complete claim is received within one year of the ITF, the ITF is a DOC placeholder and other applicable effective date rules, such as 38 CFR 3.114 and 38 CFR 3.400, may be applied based on the date of receipt of the ITF.
 
References:  For more information on
forms claimants must complete to apply for VA benefits, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a, and
assigning effective dates following receipt of an ITF, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.2.

II.iii.2.A.1.d.  Determining Active Status of an ITF

A claimant’s communication of an ITF is “active” for the purpose of assigning an earlier effective date of entitlement (as explained in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.c) until the earlier of the following occur:
VA receives a substantially complete application for benefits for the same type of benefit identified on the ITF, or
the one-year period following VA’s receipt of the communication of the ITF ends. 
Important:
Once VA associates a specific application for benefits with a communication of an ITF, that communication is no longer active for the purpose of assigning an earlier effective date of entitlement to the same specific benefit for which the claimant might subsequently apply.  This limitation applies even if VA receives the subsequent application(s) within one year of the date it received the communication of an ITF.
Once VA associates a specific application for benefits with a claimant’s communication of an ITF, the claimant may submit anothercommunication of an ITF that VA will then consider when assigning an effective date of entitlement to benefits for which the claimant might subsequently apply.   
References:  For more information on
incomplete applications and an ITF, see 
38 CFR 3.155(d)(1), and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.1.d
ITFs and incorrectly established claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2
systems review to determine the status (active or otherwise) of a claimant’s communication of an ITF, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.e, and
assigning an effective date following receipt of an ITF, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.2.

II.iii.2.A.1.e.  Identification of the Benefit Sought on the ITF

An ITF is specific to the benefit sought.  When the claim received is not for the same type of benefit identified on the ITF, the ITF may not be applied to the claim for purposes of effective date assignment. 
 
Example:  An ITF identifying pension as the benefit sought cannot be applied to a subsequent claim for compensation.
 
Note:  A survivor’s ITF on which either compensation or pension is selected as the benefit sought cannot be applied to a claim for Survivors Pension or DIC.  A survivor’s ITF with compensation or pension selected should be handled as an incomplete ITF. 
 
References:  For more information on
identification of the benefit sought on an ITF, see 38 CFR 3.155(b), and
handling incomplete ITFs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.

II.iii.2.A.1.f.  ITFs for Multiple Benefits

When a single ITF is received that has both compensation and pension boxes checked, two active ITFs are created.  Each ITF remains active until 
a claim for the corresponding benefit is received, or
the one-year period for submission of a claim for the corresponding benefit expires. 
Note:  Various systems and EP issues may impact proper update of the ITF status.  Claims processors must verify that the ITF status as reflected on the ITF screen is correct.
 
Reference:  For more information on verifying systems accuracy for ITFs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.

II.iii.2.A.1.g.  Duplicate ITFs

An ITF remains active for one year or until a claim is received, whichever occurs earlier.  A duplicate ITF is an ITF submitted for the same benefit as an ITF which has already been submitted, for which a corresponding claim has not been received. 
 
Any subsequent duplicate ITF submitted for the same benefit during the active period will have no effect on benefit entitlement.
 
Reference:  For more information on the assignment of effective date following the submission of a duplicate ITF, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.2.c.

II.iii.2.A.1.h.  Applying an ITF to Multiple Claims Received on the Same Day

When an active ITF is of record and multiple claims are subsequently received all on the same date, apply the ITF to all claims received on the same day. 
 
Example:  An ITF for compensation was received on June 11, 2022.  Subsequently, on September 14, 2022, a supplemental claim for compensation is received through the mail.  Also, on September 14, 2022, an initial claim for compensation is submitted online.  The ITF will apply to both claims received on September 14, 2022, since they were received on the same day.
 
References:  For more information on 
ITFs and supplemental claims, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.b and c, and
processing ITFs and claims submitted on the same day, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.f and g.

II.iii.2.A.1.i.  ITFs and Withdrawn Claims 

When an ITF has been associated with a claim, but the claim is subsequently successfully withdrawn and the withdrawal is not retracted, the ITF remains associated with the withdrawn claim and may not be applied to any other claim. 
 
If the withdrawal is successfully retracted, the ITF remains associated with the claim and may be utilized for the purposes of assigning an effective date. 
 
Reference:  For more information on withdrawn claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.

II.iii.2.A.1.j.  ITFs Submitted During Active Duty

An ITF generally has no effect when submitted during a period of active duty just prior to discharge due to application of 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2)(i). 
 
However, in unusual situations, such as those where there are multiple brief periods of active duty, in which the ITF has the potential to impact effective date assignment, an ITF received during active service may be applied for assignment of effective date.  However, under no circumstances may benefits be paid during a period of active service.

II.iii.2.A.1.k.  Examples of Benefits ITF Does Not Affect

ITF applies to claims for
compensation
pension
Survivors Pension, and
DIC.
The following are examples of benefits or types of claims to which ITF does not apply:
requests for dependency
ancillary benefits
requests for higher-level review
duplicate claims, and
requests for review based on clear and unmistakable error.
Note:  Prior to July 30, 2021, 38 CFR 3.155 precluded the application of ITFs to supplemental claims.  In Military-Veterans Advocacy v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, No. 19-1600 (Fed. Cir. 2021), the court invalidated this portion of VA’s regulation.  This means an ITF may now be applied to supplemental claims that are not finally adjudicated on or after July 30, 2021.
 
References:  For more information on 
ancillary benefits, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.a and b
ITFs and supplemental claims, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.b, and
ITFs and continuous pursuit in supplemental claims, see M21-1, Part X. Subpart ii, 2.A.2.c. 

II.iii.2.A.1.l.  Acknowledging Receipt of a Communication of an ITF That Includes All Required Elements

Receipt of an ITF must be recorded in the corporate record as described at M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.a.  As soon as this corporate record update takes place, the Hines Information Technology Center (ITC) generates and mails to the claimant a letter
confirming
the date VA received the claimant’s communication of an ITF, and
the benefit(s) the claimant is seeking, and
informing the claimant of
the form(s) that must be completed to apply for benefits, and
the time limit for returning the completed form(s) to VA.
Note:  Sometimes, the Hines ITC is unable to generate the letter.  Upon receipt of notice that this has occurred, manually create the letter using the Active ITF Notification Letter.

 
2.  Systems Processing of ITFs 

Introduction

This topic contains information regarding the processing of ITFs within VA electronic systems, including 
how the corporate record is updated to reflect receipt of a communication of an ITF
accepting ITFs by telephone
processing VA Form 21-0966 when no Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem (BIRLS) record exists
identifying ITFs received electronically or by employees
status of communications of an ITF as displayed in the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) and Share, and
receipt of a communication of an ITF on the same date VA receives an application for benefits through 
a VA claims submission service website, and
means other than submission via a VA claims submission service website. 

Change Date

July 14, 2025

II.iii.2.A.2.a.  How the Corporate Record Is Updated to Reflect Receipt of a Communication of an ITF

The table below describes how the corporate record is updated to reflect receipt of a communication of an ITF that contains the required elements described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b.
 
When ...
Then ...
a claimant initiates an application for benefits via a VA claims submission service website, or
a VSO, claim agent, or private attorney initiates a claim through Stakeholder Enterprise Portal
data concerning the claimant’s ITF is automatically transferred to the corporate record.
 
Note:  No corresponding VA Form 21-0966 exists in this case.
 
Reference:  For more information on VA claims submission service websites, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 4.A and B.
a VSO submits VA Form 21-0966 on a claimant’s behalf via Digits-to-Digits
data concerning the claimant’s ITF is automatically transferred to the corporate record, and
the VA Form 21-0966 is automatically uploaded into the claimant’s electronic claims folder (eFolder).
a claimant communicates an ITF to a VA call center
a call center employee enters data concerning the communication into the Customer Relationship Management (CRM) application, which automatically updates the corporate record to reflect receipt of the communication.
 
Exception:  If the claimant has no corporate record, the call center employee
completes and signs VA Form 21-0966 on the claimant’s behalf, and
routes the form to the appropriate intake processing center (IPC), where an IPC employee will manually update the corporate record through the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) or Share to reflect receipt of the communication of an ITF.
a claimant submits a completed VA Form 21-0966 to VA
the IPC of the station of origin is responsible for manually updating the corporate record through VBMS or Share to reflect receipt of the communication of an ITF.
 
Note:  Upon receipt of an incomplete VA Form 21-0966, follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.
a claimant communicates an ITF to an RO employee
the employee is responsible for manually updating the corporate record through VBMS or Share to reflect receipt of the communication of an ITF.
a claimant communicates an ITF to a Field Examiner
the Field Examiner or designated fiduciary employee will accept the ITF by following the procedures directed in FPM, Part I, 2.C.3.o, to electronically update the corporate record to reflect receipt of the communication of an ITF.
 
Notes:
To update the corporate record to reflect receipt of a communication of an ITF through
VBMS, see the VBMS Core User Guide, or
Share, see the Share User Guide.
Follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.c for processing VA Form 21-0966 when no Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem (BIRLS) record exists.
If no VBMS profile exists for a claimant, follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A for claims establishment.
References:  For more information on 
identifying ITF information when received electronically or input by an employee, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.d, and
ITFs and incorrectly established claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2.

II.iii.2.A.2.b.  Accepting ITFs By Telephone

Effective March 24, 2015, VA will only recognize compensation, pension, survivors, and related claims if they are submitted on prescribed forms.  When a claimant expressed an intent to file a claim during a telephone conversation, determine whether the claimant wishes to submit an ITF.
 
Follow the instructions in the table below if a claimant attempts to file a claim during a telephone conversation.
 
Step
Action
1
Verify the identity of the person providing the information by telephone by asking for the claimant’s
Social Security number
date of birth, or
any other information that might help to establish identity.
Note:  Complete development to the claimant by letter if the
caller is unable to furnish this information, or
person’s identity remains questionable.
2
Notify the claimant that VA regulations require all claims to be submitted on a prescribed form.
3
Review the claimant’s record to determine whether the claimant has an active ITF for the same general benefit type as the claim.
Reference:  For more information on identifying the benefit sought, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.e.
4
Use the following table to determine if the claimant has an active ITF for the same general benefit.
 
If an active ITF …
Then …
exists
notify the claimant that an active ITF associated with the same general benefit is currently pending
inform the claimant of the
date the ITF was received
appropriate form(s) needed to submit a complete application
timeframe necessary to submit the complete application to retain the ITF effective date placeholder, and
ways to submit the complete application, and
no further action is required.
does not exist
notify the claimant that an ITF can be entered and be used as an effective date placeholder if the claimant submits a complete application within one year of receipt of the ITF, and
go to Step 5.
 
5
Use the following table to determine the actions to take based on whether or not a claimant has provided authorization to enter an ITF during a telephone conversation.
 
If the claimant ...
Then ...
provided authorization
enter the ITF in the claimant’s claims folder and inform the claimant of
the appropriate form(s) needed to submit a complete application
the timeframe necessary to submit a complete application to retain the ITF effective date placeholder, and
ways to submit a complete application.
did not provide authorization
consider the communication a request for application and inform the claimant of
the appropriate form(s) needed to submit a complete application
ways to submit a complete application, and
the potential effective date if benefits are awarded, which will be the date VA receives a complete application.
 
 
References:  For more information on
requirements for a complete claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a
entering an ITF, see the VBMS Core User Guide, and
requests for applications, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.

II.iii.2.A.2.c.  Processing VA Form 21-0966 When No BIRLS Record Exists

Follow the instructions in the table below when VA receives VA Form 21-0966 from a claimant for whom no BIRLS record exists.
 
Step
Action
1
Follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A to ensure a BIRLS record does not already exist for the Veteran named on the VA Form 21-0966.
2
Follow the instructions in the Share User Guide for adding a new BIRLS record.
 
Notes:
Use information obtained from the VA Form 21-0966 to complete (to the extent possible) the fields on the VET’S IDENTIFICATION DATA tab in BIRLS.
Completion of the fields in the SERVICE DATA section of the VET’S IDENTIFICATION DATA tab is not necessary.
3
In VBMS, enter the Veteran’s claim number in the search bar at the top of any screen.
4
Click on the OPEN PROFILE button to the right of the search bar.
5
Select Edit Veteran from the options in the ACTIONS drop-down menu.
6
Enter the claimant’s address in the fields provided for this information, using the address shown on the VA Form 21-0966.
7
Follow the instructions in the VBMS Core User Guide to record receipt of the VA Form 21-0966.


II.iii.2.A.2.d.  Identifying ITFs Received Electronically or By Employees

As noted in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.a, ITFs submitted electronically through a VA claims submission service website or those communicated directly to an employee will not be recorded on VA Form 21-0966.  Rather, the receipt of ITF will be reflected
in the corporate record on the VBMS INTENT TO FILE screen, and
by the Hines ITC generated letter available for review in the eFolder. 
Thus, it is necessary to review the VBMS INTENT TO FILE screen to ensure that all ITFs are considered for the purpose of assigning correct effective dates for claims.
 
Follow the steps in the table below to locate ITF information in VBMS.  
 
Step
Action
1
Open the Veteran’s VBMS profile by entering the file number in the search bar and selecting OPEN PROFILE. 
2
Click on the INTENT TO FILE tab.  The INTENT TO FILE screen will display.
 
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/b270a443-dd33-4ff3-838e-b80ffd4a90e2" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
3
Click the STATUS drop-down menu in the top right corner and select All to show all receipts of ITF. 
 
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/7380e8c6-d2c0-47bc-8154-67846aee33fa" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
4
Compare the INTENT TO FILE screen with the documents in the eFolder and ensure the correct ITF is being considered.
Reference:  For information on ITF data accuracy, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.
 
References:  For more information on 
entering and viewing ITF information in VBMS, see the VBMS Core User Guide, and
selecting an effective date following receipt of an ITF, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.2.c.     

II.iii.2.A.2.e.  Status of Communications of an ITF as Displayed in VBMS and Share

The status of each communication of an ITF that VA receives is displayed in Share and VBMS. 
 
The table below provides the meaning behind each status the system may assign.
 
Status
Meaning
Active
VA received a communication of an ITF that contains the required elements set forth in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b.
 
A communication of an ITF remains in this status until the earlierof the following occur:
VA receives a substantially complete application for benefits, or
the one-year period following VA’s receipt of the communication ends.
Note:  No more than one communication of an intent to file a claim for a general benefit may be in an active status at any given period of time.
Duplicate
While a communication of an intent to file a claim for a general benefit is in an active status, VA receives another communication of an intent to file a claim for the same benefit.
Incomplete
VA received a communication of an ITF that did not contain the required elements set forth in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b.
Expired
The claimant failed to submit a substantially complete application within one year of the date VA received a communication of an ITF from the claimant.
Claim Received
VA received a substantially complete application for a benefit from a claimant within one year of the date VA received a communication of an intent to file a claim for the same general benefit from the claimant.
Canceled
An ITF was established erroneously and subsequently canceled by a VA employee with an associated cancellation reason, such as Incorrect Received Date.
 
Note:  Once a claimant communicates an intent to file a claim for a general benefit, and follows it up (within a one-year period of time) with a substantially complete application for the same benefit, the claimant may later (before the initial claim is resolved) communicate another intent to file a claim for the same benefit (albeit a different contention).
 
Scenario: 
VA receives VA Form 21-0966 from a claimant on May 10, 2015.
The claimant checked the Compensation box on the form.
VA receives a substantially complete VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, on August 10, 2015.
Result:  Once VA acknowledges receipt of the VA Form 21-526EZ, the status of the claimant’s pending communication of an ITF changes from Active to Claim Received.  Once this occurs,
the claimant may submit another communication of an intent to file a claim for compensation, and
VA will not consider the subsequent communication a duplicatecommunication of an ITF.  The system will assign the status of Active to the subsequent communication of an ITF.

II.iii.2.A.2.f.  Receipt of a Communication of an ITF on the Same Date VA Receives an Application for Benefits Through a VA Claims Submission Service Website

When VA receives a communication of an intent to file a claim for a general benefit on the same date it receives an application for the same benefit through a VA claims submission service website, the status of the communication of the ITF will be displayed in VBMS and Share as
Claim Received, as long as no other communication of an intent to file a claim for the same general benefit remains in an active status, or
Duplicate, if an earlier communication of an intent to file a claim for the same general benefit is still in an active status. 
If a claimant submits an application via a VA claims submission service website then initiates another application via a VA claims submission service website on the same day, the status of the communication of the  ITF will be displayed in VBMS and Share as Active.
 
The table below contains examples of the application of the principle discussed in the above paragraphs, to include the information that will be displayed in VBMS and Share based on the facts associated with each individual scenario.
 
Evidence Received
ITF Status 
Receipt Date
Explanation
Scenario 1 
A claimant initiates, completes, and submits an application through a VA claims submission service website on June 15, 2024.
Claim Received
June 15, 2024
The initiation of a claim in a VA claims submission service website is accepted as an ITF.  Since the application was received on the same date, the ITF is consumed and status will show claim received.  
Scenario 2
VA receives a VA Form 21-0966 for compensation from a claimant on June 15, 2024.
The claimant initiates, completes, and submits an application through a VA claims submission service website on July 20, 2024.
Claim Received
June 15, 2024
Initially, the receipt of VA Form 21-0966 on June 15, 2024, will be reflected in active status on the ITF screen.  The initiation of the ITF on July 20, 2024, results in generation of another ITF, which is a duplicate ITF.  The submission of the application on July 20, 2024, results in consumption of the June 15, 2024, ITF and the status of that ITF is updated to claim received.

Duplicate
July 20, 2024

Scenario 3
A claimant initiates, completes, and submits an application through a VA claims submission service website on June 15, 2024.
Later the same day, the claimant initiates a new application in a VA claims submission service website.
Claim Received
June 15, 2024
The initiation of the claim in a VA claims submission service website generates an ITF on June 15, 2024.  That ITF is consumed by the immediate submission of a claim on the same date, so that first ITF status isclaim received.  The subsequent initiation of a new application in a VA claims submission service website will generate another ITF.  Since no claim was submitted after that application initiation, the ITF status is active.

Active
June 15, 2024

Reference:  For more information on claims submission service websites, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 4.A and B.

II.iii.2.A.2.g.  Receipt of a Communication of an ITF on the Same Date VA Receives an Application for Benefits Through Means Other Than Submission Via a VA Claims Submission Service Website

When VA receives a communication of an intent to file a claim for a general benefit on the same date it receives an application for the same benefit through means other than a VA claims submission service website, the ITF will remain active pending receipt of a subsequent claim.  No further development to the claimant is required in same-day receipt situations.

  
3.  Incomplete ITFs 
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on handling incomplete ITFs, including 
handling an incomplete VA Form 21-0966 prior to receipt of a subsequent claim
acknowledging receipt of an incomplete VA Form 21-0966, and
handling an incomplete VA Form 21-0966 after receipt of a subsequent claim. 

Change Date

September 6, 2022

II.iii.2.A.3.a.  Handling an Incomplete VA Form 21-0966 Prior to Receipt of a Subsequent Claim

Follow the instructions in the table below when
VA receives a VA Form 21-0966 from a claimant
the form does not contain the required elements described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b, and
a subsequent claim has not yet been received.
Important:  The date of receipt of a VA Form 21-0966 that does not contain the required elements set forth in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b cannot be used to establish a potential effective date for entitlement to VA benefits.  When an incomplete ITF is received but later made complete with further development either via telephone or letter, the date of receipt of the completed ITF or information required to complete the ITF is applicable for future assignment of effective dates.  
  
If the claimant ...
Then ...
cannot be identified
follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.C.5 for handling unidentifiable mail.
can be identified but the claimant did not specify the benefit being sought
attempt to contact the claimant by telephone
document attempts to contact the claimant according to the instructions in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.d and e, and
follow the instructions in the table below. 
If attempts to obtain the missing information by telephone are …
Then …
successful
follow the instructions in the VBMS Core User Guide (under the heading Creating New Intent to File) to update the corporate record to reflect receipt of the VA Form 21-0966.
unsuccessful
update VBMS to reflect receipt of the form.

can be identified but did not sign the form
input the information contained on the form into VBMS.
 
Note:  The Intent to File process to record an incomplete VA Form 21-0966 was not available until April 2015.  Prior to this date, users tracked VA Forms 21-0966that did not contain the required elements described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b through the 
establishment of an EP 400, and
creation of a custom tracked item with a description of Incomplete ITF.

II.iii.2.A.3.b.Acknowledging Receipt of an Incomplete VA Form 21-0966

As soon as the update to VBMS described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.a, takes place, the Hines ITC generates a letter acknowledging VA’s receipt of VA Form 21-0966 and informs the claimant that the form cannot be accepted as communication of an ITF.  The letter also informs the claimant of
the elements of the form that are missing (per the requirements set forth in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b), and
the requirement to submit to VA
communication of an ITF that contains all the required elements, and/or
an application for VA benefits on one of the prescribed forms listed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a.
Note:  Sometimes, the Hines ITC is unable to generate the letter or the letter is generated with an inaccurate address.  Upon receipt of notice that this has occurred, manually create the letter using the Incomplete ITF letter.
 
References:  For more information on the action to take when an incomplete ITF is received and a subsequent claim is received before the letter acknowledging receipt of the incomplete ITF is sent to the claimant, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.c.

II.iii.2.A.3.c.  Handling an Incomplete VA Form 21-0966 After Receipt of a Subsequent Claim

Follow the steps in the table below when
VA receives a VA Form 21-0966 from a claimant
the form does not contain the required elements described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b
a subsequent claim has been received, and
the claimant has not been sent the letter acknowledging receipt of the ITF as described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.b.
Important:  The date of receipt of a VA Form 21-0966 that does not contain the required elements set forth in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.b cannot be used to establish a potential effective date for entitlement to VA benefits.
 
Step
Action
1
Do not enter the ITF in VBMS.  (The purpose of not entering the ITF in VBMS is to prevent generation of the Hines ITC letter described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.b.)
2
Notify the claimant that the ITF cannot be utilized in conjunction with the current claim using the Incomplete ITF—Claim Received letter. 


 
4.  ITF Data Accuracy 

Introduction

This topic contains information regarding the need to review ITF data for accuracy in VA systems, including 
reviewing ITF status for accuracy based on circumstances of claim
validating the accuracy of the ITF data in the corporate record
correction of ITF data—
same day, and
different day
Super Supervisor review for canceled ITFs
calculating the timeliness of receipt of ITFs
programming errors impacting date of receipt of ITF, and
time zone issues impacting ITF. 

Change Date

September 6, 2022

II.iii.2.A.4.a.  Reviewing ITF Status for Accuracy Based on Circumstances of Claim

When an ITF is submitted, either by virtue of initiation of an electronic application or by specific submission by a claimant, and the subsequent claim is for a benefit to which ITF does not apply, validate the accuracy of the ITF data in the corporate record as directed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.b to ensure ITF status remains active when appropriate.  Take corrective action when ITF status is not accurate.   

II.iii.2.A.4.b.  Validating the Accuracy of ITF Data in the Corporate Record

Claims processors are responsible for validating the accuracy of data in the corporate record regarding a claimant’s communication of an ITF.
 
When inaccurate ITF information exists and a correction is being made on
the same day that the ITF was created, but prior to the daily ITF batch run, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.c, or
a different day than the ITF was created or after the daily batch run, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.d.
Notes:  
The daily ITF batch run refers to the system process that occurs once daily in the evening to update ITF statuses.  If an attempt to update an ITF status is made after the daily ITF batch run begins, a system message will appear indicating that the user does not have the authority to make changes to ITF status.
In situations where an ITF is expressed to a VA employee, the data is transcribed directly into the CRM system and/or the corporate record and need not be separately documented on VA Form 21-0966 or VA Form 27-0820, Report of General Information, as described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.2.a and d.  In these situations, additional validation is not necessary as no separate data will exist to use for validation.   

II.iii.2.A.4.c.  Correction of ITF Data—Same Day

Any user who has permission to add an ITF can cancel or edit the ITF on the same day the ITF was created, before the batch run starts for that day.  When an ITF is created and canceled prior to the daily batch run, no letter will be issued to the Veteran/survivor.
 
The following provisions apply for cancellation of an ITF on the same day that it was added:
ITFs that were added by the Veteran or a representative using a VA claims submission service website cannot be canceled using VBMS.
An ITF in the Claim Received or Canceled status cannot be canceled.
A canceled ITF will not be deleted.  It will be displayed with the set of ITFs for the Veteran with a status of canceled.
The following provisions apply for editing an ITF on the same day that it was added:
ITFs that were added by the Veteran or a representative using a VA claims submission service website cannot be edited using VBMS.
Only ITFs in Active status can be edited.
Only the Benefit Sought and Received Date fields may be edited.  However, Benefit Sought cannot be edited if there is another ITF for the other benefit type.  

II.iii.2.A.4.d.  Correction of ITF Data—Different Day

Cancellation of an ITF after the day the ITF was created may only be performed by Super Supervisors.  No editing of ITF data is allowed at regional offices after the batch run has started on the day the ITF was created. 
 
In situations where ITF data requires an edit that cannot be done by a regular user
refer the case to the Super Supervisor for cancellation of the ITF so that it can be correctly re-established, or
if cancellation and re-establishment cannot be accomplished, refer the case to the National Service Desk Solution Center by utilizing the YourIT system.  

II.iii.2.a.4.e.  Super Supervisor Review for Canceled ITFs

A Super Supervisor has the ability to cancel ITFs after the day the ITF was created.  For these situations, the Veteran or survivor has already received correspondence regarding the ITF expiration date.  However, no system generated letter is created for notification of ITF cancellation. 
 
Following cancellation of the ITF after the day the ITF was created, the Super Supervisor or a designee must notify the claimant of cancellation of the ITF either
via telephone, notifying the Veteran or survivor that
a letter was erroneously sent indicating that an ITF was received and would be utilized as an effective date placeholder, and
the error has been corrected and the ITF has been removed from the record, or
if telephone notification is not possible, via letter using the ITF Cancellation letter.
Note:  If the ITF is cancelled for the purposes of editing the data, tailor the notification appropriately to inform the Veteran or survivor of the appropriate circumstances concerning the ITF status. 

II.iii.2.A.4.f.Calculating the Timeliness of Receipt of ITFs

Apply 38 CFR 3.110 in the calculation of timeliness of receipt of a claim following receipt of an ITF.
 
When determining whether a claim is timely received following receipt of an ITF, calculate the applicable time period by 
excluding the first day
including the last day, and
including the following workday when the time limit expires on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
Examples: 
An ITF is received June 7, 2024 (Friday).  The subsequent claim is received on June 9, 2025 (Monday).  Consider the claim timely received since the one-year expiration of the ITF occurred on a weekend and the claim was received on the following workday.
An ITF is received on June 17, 2024 (Monday).  The claim is received on June 17, 2025 (Tuesday).  The claim is timely received because the last day is included in the calculation of timeliness. 
Notes: 
The ITF screen in VBMS is not currently programmed to consider 38 CFR 3.110 in the reflection of ITF status when the submission period expires on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
Systems tools for calculating or suggesting effective dates do not factor in applicability of 38 CFR 3.110.

II.iii.2.A.4.g.  Programming Errors Impacting Date of Receipt of ITF

In some cases, updates to the corporate record for both manually entered and electronically submitted communications of an ITF were affected by a programming error that caused the incorrect date of receipt of the communication to appear
in Share and eBenefits, and
on the acknowledgement letter referenced in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.l.
This programming error impacted ITFs recorded
between June 26, 2015, and December 13, 2015, and
in other isolated incidents outside this date range.
When the assignment of an effective date for a grant of entitlement to benefits is necessary in a case involving a claimant who communicated to VA an ITF, and there is a date discrepancy, utilize the date of receipt of the communication as shown in a
VBMS note, or
VA Form 21-0966 in the claimant’s claims folder. 
In the event that none of the above-mentioned items can be used to verify the ITF receipt date, the VBMS date should be utilized as the date of receipt of the ITF for consideration when assigning an effective date. 
Reference:  For more information on ITF errors occurring in August 2023, see Interim Guidance: Notice of Exception to Date of Receipt Rule (with Effective Date Examples).

II.iii.2.A.4.h.  Time Zone Issues Impacting ITF

A system defect has occurred periodically in which a time zone issue impacts the date of receipt of an ITF.  The defect can impact both electronic and manually entered ITFs and occurs when submissions are made near midnight.
 
VBMS operates on a server in the Eastern Standard Time zone while the corporate database operates on a Central Standard Time server.   
 
In situations where an ITF appears to be affected by a time zone discrepancy, review the time stamp on the ITF and claim to determine if the submission was made near midnight and potentially impacted by a time zone discrepancy.  Any corrections to date of receipt must be made by following the procedures described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.b. 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section B - Supplemental Claims
Article ID: 554400000174874
Updated Sep 18, 2025

<--Previous Section  Next Section-->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the topic “Supplemental Claims.”

 
1.  Supplemental Claims
 

Introduction

This topic includes information on supplemental claims, including
definition of
supplemental claim, and
same or similar benefit on same or similar basis
prescribed supplemental claim form
requirement for potentially new evidence, and
handling incomplete supplemental claims.

Change Date

September 18, 2025

II.iii.2.B.1.a.  Definition:  Supplemental Claim

A supplemental claim is any complete claim for a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefit on a prescribed application form where the claimant or his/her authorized representative disagrees with the decision VA made on an initial or supplemental claim for the same or similar benefit on the same or similar basis. 
Notes:
A supplemental claim can be submitted at any time. 
Claimants may file a supplemental claim on a decision issued before February 19, 2019, the date of implementation of the Appeals Modernization Act.
References:  For more information on 
supplemental claims, see 38 CFR 3.2501, and
effective dates when a supplemental claim is granted, see
38 CFR 3.2500(h), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.3.

II.iii.2.B.1.b.  Definition:  Same or Similar Benefit on Same or Similar Basis

Generally, the same or similar benefit on the same or similar basis means VA has previously decided a claim for the same benefit type. 
 
Examples of distinct types of benefits:
service connection (SC) for right knee arthritis
entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. 1151
entitlement to individual unemployability (IU)
SC for cause of death, and
entitlement to non-service-connected pension
Important:  
In claims for compensation, a claim based on a new theory of SC is a supplemental claim.  A new theory of SC (for example, when direct SC was previously denied, and secondary SC is now claimed) is sufficient new and relevant evidence to satisfy the evidentiary threshold discussed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.d.
Entitlement to IU may also be reasonably raised as part of a supplemental claim for other issues even if IU has not been previously claimed or decided.  Follow the guidance in M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.f for identifying reasonably raised IU.
Exception:  A claim under 38 U.S.C. 1151 for a disability that was previously denied SC under 38 U.S.C. 1110 (or vice versa) is not a new theory of SC and does not represent a supplemental claim for the same or similar benefit on the same or similar basis.  Instead, consider it as a new claim for a separate and distinct benefit type.
 
References:  For more information on
distinguishing a supplemental claim from a claim for increase, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.C, and
new and relevant evidence, see
38 CFR 3.2501, and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.c.

II.iii.2.B.1.c.  Prescribed Supplemental Claim Form 

Supplemental claims must be submitted on the prescribed supplemental claim form, VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request:  Supplemental Claim.
 
Reference:  For more information on the definition of a complete supplemental claim, see 38 CFR 3.160(a).

II.iii.2.B.1.d.  Requirement for Potentially New Evidence

To be considered a complete claim, a supplemental claim must identify or include potentially new evidence.
Potentially new evidence is evidence that may be new to the claim, thereby providing some potential basis for a supplemental claim.  When deciding if a supplemental claim is substantially complete, there is no need to determine that the evidence is non-duplicative or that it is relevant.  Any evidence must be accepted when making the complete claim threshold determination. 
 
Note:  Once a claim is considered substantially complete, a decision must be issued on the basis of whether the evidence is new and relevant as described in M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.d.
Carefully screen all newly received evidence per the steps in the table below to determine the appropriate action.
 
Step
Action
1
Determine if there is potentially new evidence by reviewing for
evidence submitted or identified with the claim
additional treatment records found by following the instructions in M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.a, and
evidence submitted while the evidentiary record was closed, such as
during the processing of a higher-level review, or
after a final decision unaccompanied by a claim or decision review.
Is there potentially new evidence?
If yes, go to the next step.
If no, follow the incomplete claim procedures detailed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.e.
2
Does the new evidence warrant additional development action(s)?
If yes,
complete required development actions, and, when complete,
refer the claim for a decision.
If no, either
take authorization/award action (if no rating decision is needed), or
refer the claim to the rating activity for a decision once any applicable 30-day response period required under Section 5103 has expired.
 
References:  For more information on
the definition of a complete claim, see
38 CFR 3.160(a), and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f
duty to assist and supplemental claims, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.d
new and relevant evidence, see 38 CFR 3.2501
new and relevant evidence and claims for increase, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.C, and
action required on evidence submitted with a supplemental claim, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.e.

II.iii.2.B.1.e.  Handling Incomplete Supplemental Claims

If the claimant submits a supplemental claim that is not substantially complete, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b to notify the claimant.
Important:  A claimant must submit a complete supplemental claim within 60 days of notice by VA that an incomplete claim was filed, in order to preserve the filing date of the incomplete claim.
 
References:  For more information on
criteria for a substantially complete application, see
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3), and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f, and
effective date considerations for incomplete supplemental claims, see
38 CFR 3.155(d), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.3.f.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section C - Claims for Increase
Article ID: 554400000174875
Updated Aug 28, 2025

 <--Previous Section  Next Section-->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1 
Identification of Claims for Increase
2 
Policies for Claims for Increase
3
Interpreting Submissions for Increased Compensation


 
1.  Identification of Claims for Increase
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about claims for increase, including
definition of a claim for increase
types of claims for increase, and
prescribed form for a claim for increased compensation.

Change Date

January 24, 2022

II.iii.2.C.1.a.  Definition: Claim for Increase

Per 38 CFR 3.1(p)(1), a claim for increase is a type of initial claim that requests an increase in a disability evaluation or rate of a benefit being paid based on a change or worsening in condition or circumstance since the last decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for the benefit.
 
Important:  Under 38 CFR 3.2500, a claimant may also submit a request for review of a prior evaluation or rate being paid.  Any request filed on the appropriate form under these review options should be handled under the specific lane of review selected by the claimant, and not under the claim for increase provisions.
 
Reference:  For more information on handling submissions for increased compensation, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.C.3.

II.iii.2.C.1.b.  Types of Claims for Increase

Claims for increase may include, but are not limited to, claims for
increased service-connected (SC) compensation including
increased disability evaluation
individual unemployability (IU), and
entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC)
an increased rate of benefits due to the addition of a dependent, and
increased non-service-connected (NSC) pension including a claim
showing either a reduction of, or a deduction from, income, and
for entitlement to special monthly pension (SMP).
References:  For more information on
distinguishing a claim for increase from a supplemental claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.C.3, and
the relationship between a claim for IU and the associated SC disabilities, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.e.

II.iii.2.C.1.c.  Prescribed Form for a Claim for Increased Compensation

A claim for an increased evaluation in an SC disability must be filed on VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, or other prescribed form appropriate to the specific type of increased compensation sought.
 
Reference:  For more information on prescribed forms, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.

 
2.  Policies for Claims for Increase
 

Introduction

This topic contains policies for claims for increase, including
responsibilities of the rating activity, and
claims for increase in the level of disability.

Change Date

January 28, 2016

II.iii.2.C.2.a.  Responsibilities of the Rating Activity

The rating activity is responsible for evaluating disabilities under the applicable laws and rating schedule, including statutory benefits such as
loss or loss of use of various body organs or parts
SMP, other than aid and attendance (A&A) awarded to patients in nursing homes, and
SMC.

II.iii.2.C.2.b.  Claims for Increase in the Level of Disability

Refer any claim for increase in the level of disability to the rating activity for action after completing any necessary development actions. 
References:  For information on 
requesting records, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C, and
when to order an examination in a claim for increased evaluation, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.h. 

 
3.  Interpreting Submissions for Increased Compensation
 

Introduction

This topic contains procedures for interpreting submissions for increased compensation, including
distinguishing claims for increase from requests for decision review, and
screening submissions for increased compensation.

Change Date

August 28, 2025

II.iii.2.C.3.a.  Distinguishing Claims for Increase From Requests for Decision Review

Under 38 CFR 3.2500(a)(2), claimants can request a review of a decision issued on a claim at any time after VA issues notice of a decision.  Therefore, screen all submissions regarding evaluation issues to determine the intent of the claimant.  The form used by the claimant will determine whether the submission should be handled as a
claim for increase, or
decision review request under 38 CFR 3.2500.
Note:  In cases where the claimant’s intent is unclear, attempt to clarify the claim by following the procedures in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.c.

II.iii.2.C.3.b.  Screening Submissions for Increased Compensation

Screen all submissions for increased compensation based on the table below.
If the claimant submits ...
Then handle the submission as a ...
VA Form 21-526EZ, or
other prescribed form for the increased benefit sought
claim for increase.
VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim
supplemental claim.
evidence regarding an evaluation issue without a prescribed claim form
request for application per M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.
References:  For more information on 
prescribed forms, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A
supplemental claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.B, and
effective dates for 
claims for increase, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5, and 
supplemental claims, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.3.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section D - Claims Based on Reports of Examination or Hospitalization
Article ID: 554400000174876
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section-->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Claims Based on Reports of Examination or Hospitalization
2
Claims Based on Reports of Examination or Hospitalization Prior to March 24, 2015 


1.  Claims Based on Reports of Examination or Hospitalization

Introduction

This topic contains information on reviewing reports of examination or hospitalization at Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) facilities, military treatment facilities (MTFs), or private healthcare facilities to determine whether claims action is warranted, including
handling notice of a report of VA or MTF examination or hospitalization occurring on or after March 24, 2015, and
considering evidence of VA or MTF examination or hospitalization occurring on or after March 24, 2015.

Change Date

June 24, 2021

II.iii.2.D.1.a.Handling Notice of a Report of VA or MTF Examination or Hospitalization Occurring on or After March 24, 2015

Notice of examination in a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) facility or military treatment facility (MTF) occurring on or after March 24, 2015, is not a claim.  The date of examination will be considered for effective date purposes if a complete claim or intent to file (ITF) is received within one year from the date of examination or hospitalization for the following: 
a claim for an increased disability evaluation received for one or more conditions treated as part of the examination or hospitalization, or
pension, when entitlement to pension was previously denied based on the absence of evidence of permanent and total (P&T) disability. 
Important:  Notice of hospitalization in a VA facility occurring on or after March 24, 2015, will result in an adjudicative determination as to entitlement to a temporary evaluation under 38 CFR 4.29 or 38 CFR 4.30 as discussed in M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.B and C.  However, a report of hospitalization will only result in adjudicative action applicable to disabilities which are currently service-connected (SC) when a rating under 38 CFR 4.29 or 38 CFR 4.30 can be granted.   
Note:  A report of VA examination or hospitalization occurring on or after March 24, 2015, showing a nursing home stay is not sufficient to grant aid and attendance (A&A) without a formal application.
References:  For more information on 
considering reports of examination or hospitalization for effective date purposes in subsequent claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.D.1.b, and
prescribed form requirements for a grant of A&A, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.

II.iii.2.D.1.b.Considering Evidence of VA or MTF Examination or Hospitalization Occurring on or After March 24, 2015

If unsolicited VA or MTF medical evidence shows treatment, but not hospitalization over 21 days on or after March 24, 2015, do not establish an end product (EP) to control receipt of this evidence.  Ensure the evidence is associated with the beneficiary’s claim folder, as this evidence may be utilized for effective date purposes if a formal claim or ITF is received within one year of the date of treatment.
Important:  When VA or MTF medical evidence was requested in association with a prior claim but was received after a decision was made, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.A.5 for handling late-flowing, solicited mail. 
Example:  Veteran is SC for diabetes mellitus type 2 at 10 percent due to a restricted diet.  A VA medical center (VAMC) treatment report dated June 10, 2015, shows a physician prescribed oral medication as part of the diabetic treatment plan.  On March 1, 2016, the Veteran submits an ITF for compensation benefits.  On September 20, 2016, the Veteran submits a claim for an increase in diabetes mellitus type 2.  The Veteran’s
date of claim (DOC) is September 20, 2016
active ITF date is March 1, 2016, and
effective date of increase is June 10, 2015.
An ITF for compensation benefits was received within one year of the treatment warranting an increased evaluation.  The Veteran submitted a complete compensation claim within a year of the VA receiving the active ITF.

 2.  Claims Based on Reports of Examination or Hospitalization Prior to March 24, 2015
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on reviewing reports of examination or hospitalization at VA facilities, MTFs, or private healthcare facilities occurring prior to March 24, 2015, to determine whether claims action is warranted, including
accepting a report of VA or MTF examination or hospitalization dated prior to March 24, 2015, as a claim
establishing a claim based on VA medical treatment prior to March 24, 2015, and
accepting evidence of private examination or hospitalization occurring prior to March 24, 2015.

Change Date

June 24, 2021

II.iii.2.D.2.a.  Accepting a Report of VA or MTF Examination or Hospitalization Dated Prior to March 24, 2015, as a Claim 

Evidence of examination or hospitalization in a VA facility or MTF (also known as uniformed service facility) occurring before March 24, 2015, is an informal claim for
an increased disability rating for an SC disability, or
pension, when entitlement to pension was previously denied based on the absence of evidence of P&T disability.
Note:  A notice of hospitalization may not suffice as an informal claim if a Veteran with an SC disability(ies) is hospitalized for a disability for which service connection has not been established.

II.iii.2.D.2.b.  Establishing a Claim Based on VA Medical Treatment Prior to March 24, 2015

Follow the steps in the table below if the VA medical evidence shows treatment prior to March 24, 2015, for
an SC disability, or
manifestations of an SC disability.
Step
Action
1
Accept the date of admission for treatment, date of outpatient treatment, or date of examination for an SC disability as the DOC for increased evaluation.
2
Establish and maintain control of the claim.
  
Important:  If unsolicited VA medical evidence, other than reports of hospitalization, shows treatment on or after March 24, 2015, do not establish an EP to control for receipt of this evidence.  No further action is needed other than ensuring that records submitted by a claimant are associated with the claims folder, as this evidence may be utilized for effective date purposes if a formal claim is received within one year of the date of treatment. 
 
References:  For more information on
procedures for processing solicited or unsolicited mail, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.A.5.d
circumstances in which it is appropriate to incorporate VA treatment records into the claims folder when not submitted by a claimant, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.b, d, and h
the effective date for an increase in compensation, see 
38 CFR 3.400(o), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5
establishing a claim based on VA medical treatment prior to March 24, 2015, see historical 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1)
the characteristics of an informal clam received prior to March 24, 2015, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.1
accepting medical evidence from an MTF as an informal claim prior to March 24, 2015, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.D.2.a, and
reviewing a report of hospitalization at a VA hospital or MTF dated on or after March 24, 2015, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.D.1.a.

II.iii.2.D.2.c.  Accepting Evidence of Private Examination or Hospitalization Occurring Prior to March 24, 2015

Private medical evidence may be accepted as a claim if
it shows treatment for an SC disability or manifestations of an SC disability prior to March 24, 2015
it shows a reasonable probability of entitlement to a benefit, and
it was received by VA prior to March 24, 2015.
Note:  Once a claim is established, refer it for development or rating activity as necessary.
 
References:  For more information on
the effective date for an increase in compensation, see 
38 CFR 3.400(o), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5, and
establishing a clam based on private medical treatment prior to March 24, 2015, see historical 38 CFR 3.157(b)(2).
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section E - Incorrectly Established Claims
Article ID: 554400000174877
Updated Jul 16, 2025

   <-- Previous Section  Next Section-->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Incorrectly Established Claims Identification and Notification
2
Handling Incorrectly Established Claims
3
Receipt of Claims in Response to Incorrectly Established Claims 


  
1.  Incorrectly Established Claims Identification and Notification  

Introduction

This topic contains guidance for identifying and notifying claimants of incorrectly established claims, including
how to identify an incorrectly established claim, and
information to provide the claimant or authorized representative

Change Date

July 16, 2025

II.iii.2.E.1.a.   How to Identify an Incorrectly Established Claim

As stated in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a effective March 24, 2015, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) will only recognize compensation, pension, survivors, and related claims if they are submitted on the required standard forms.
 
The term “incorrectly established claim” refers to a request for benefits not submitted on a prescribed form that was received and
established and processed under a new end product (EP), or
added to an existing EP and processed.
In situations where a claim was incorrectly established based on receipt of a request for benefits not submitted on a prescribed form, corrective action is needed as described in this topic.
 
Note:  These instructions do not apply to a request for application that was misidentified as a claim but has not had development initiated.  For these situations, follow the guidance in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.

II.iii.2.E.1.b.Information to Provide the Claimant or Authorized Representative

Upon identification of a claim that has been established improperly due to non-receipt of a prescribed form, take action to resolve the issue. The claims processor must inform the claimant and/or authorized representative
that the request for benefits was incorrectly accepted as a claim, and VA regulations require that all claims must be submitted on a prescribed form effective March 24, 2015
which issues or conditions cannot be considered a valid claim
which form to submit
that VA will not continue to process a pending request for benefits until a complete claim is received on a prescribed form
of the timeframe the claimant has to submit a prescribed form, if an active intent to file (ITF) is pending, and
of expedited claims submission options such as 
filing the claim using a VA claims submission service website, or
submitting a claim through their Veterans service organization.

 
 2.  Handling Incorrectly Established Claims
  

Introduction

This topic contains miscellaneous information about claims for VA benefits, including
determining what steps to take to take to address the incorrectly established claim
instructions for addressing incorrectly established single contention EPs when a decision 
has not been made, and
has been made
instructions for addressing incorrectly established contentions on a valid EP when a decision
has not been made, and
has been made, and
disagreements received on incorrectly added and decided claims.

Change Date

July 16, 2025

II.iii.2.E.2.a.Determining What Steps to Take to Address the Incorrectly Established Claim

Refer to the table below to determine the steps for addressing an incorrectly established claim.
If the incorrectly established claim …
And …
Then refer to …
is the only contention on the EP
has not been addressed in a rating decision
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2.b.

has been addressed in a rating decision
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2.c.
is a contention on a pending EP with other valid contentions
has not been addressed in a rating decision
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2.d.

has been addressed in a rating decision
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2.e.
  

II.iii.2.E.2.b. Instructions for Addressing Incorrectly Established Single Contention EPs When a Decision Has Not Been Made

Follow the steps in the table below to address requests for benefits that were incorrectly established as an EP and a decision has not been made.
 
Step
Action
1
Review the claimant’s record to determine whether an active ITF (for the same general benefit as the incorrectly established claim) was pending prior to the incorrect establishment of the EP.
 
Was an active ITF pending?
If yes
ensure that the ITF status is correctly reflected in the claimant corporate record
submit requests to correct an ITF status to the Enterprise service Desk (ESD), and
go to Step 3. 
If no, go to Step 2.
References:  For more information on
an ITF status, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.d, and
requesting correction of incorrect ITF data, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.c and d.
2
Determine how VA received the request for benefits.  If the request for benefits was received through
centralized mail (CM), go to Step 3, or
telephone or in-person contact with a VA representative,
establish an ITF effective the date of the contact, and
go to Step 3.
3
Make two attempts in a 24-hour period to contact the claimant and/or authorized representative and provide the information in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.1.b.  
 
Does the claimant have an authorized representative?
If yes, call, e-mail, or if co-located at the regional office (RO), meet the authorized representative in person.
If no, call the claimant.
If attempts to contact are
successful, wait two business days for receipt of the complete claim on a prescribed form, then go to the next step, or
unsuccessful, go to the next step.
Important:  All successful telephone or in-person contact must be documented on VA Form 27-0820, Report of General Information, and included in the claims folder.  All e-mail correspondence must be included in the claims folder.
4
Has a complete claim been received since the establishment of the invalid EP?
If yes,
change the invalid EP to EP 400, General Correspondence
clear the EP 400
establish a new EP (ex. EP 020) with a date of claim (DOC) based on receipt of the complete claim, and
finish development of the complete claim under the new EP.
If no, go to the next step.
5
Determine which form the claimant must submit to pursue the claim and follow the instructions in the table below.
If the correct form is a(n) ...
Then ...
VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits
change the invalid EP to EP 400, General Correspondence 
send the Incorrectly Established Claim letter, and
clear the EP 400.
Important:  If the invalid EP is an Appeals Modernization Act EP, cancel the EP and establish the EP 400, General Correspondence, and complete the remaining steps above.
decision review form
change the invalid EP to EP 400, General Correspondence 
send the AMA Request for Application letter inputting the following free text in the PREVIOUSLY DENIED ISSUES text field: 
[incorrectly established issue(s)]. “Please disregard our prior correspondence regarding these issues. In order for us to adjudicate your request for benefits, you must submit an application. We apologize for any confusion this may have caused.”, and
clear the EP 400.
 


II.iii.2.E.2.c.  Instructions for Addressing Incorrectly Established Single Contention EPs When a Decision Has Been Made

Follow the steps in the table below to address requests for benefits that were incorrectly established as an EP, when a decision has been made.
 
Step
Action
1
Review the claimant’s record to determine whether an active ITF (for the same general benefit as the incorrectly established claim) was pending prior to the incorrect establishment of the EP.
 
Was an active ITF pending?
If yes,
ensure that the ITF status is correctly reflected in the claimant corporate record
submit requests to correct an ITF status to the ESD, and
go to Step 3.
If no, go to Step 2.
References:  For more information on
an ITF status, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.d, and
requesting correction of incorrect ITF data, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.c and d.
2
Determine how VA received the request for benefits.  If the request for benefits was received through
CM, go to Step 3, or
telephone or in-person contact with a VA representative,
establish an ITF effective the date of the contact, and
go to Step 3.
3
Has the rating decision that addressed the incorrectly established claim been promulgated and authorized?
If yes, go to Step 4.
If no,
return the case to the rating activity, and
the rating activity will
pull the rating back into Veterans Benefits Management System-Rating (VBMS-R) for corrections
delete the issues that were invalid to ensure the conditions are removed from the master record
return the rating with update
follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.b to request deletion of the rating decision Narrative and Codesheet, and
route the case to the development activity to complete the actions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2.b beginning with Step 3. 
4
Review the claimant’s record to determine if a complete claim has been received and a valid EP is pending.
 
If a complete claim ...
and the invalid EP …
Then ...
has been received since the establishment of the invalid EP
is still pending
change the invalid EP to the appropriate variant of EP 930 – Correction of National Quality Error
establish a new EP with a DOC based on receipt of the complete claim, and
finish development of the complete claim under the new EP.

has been cleared and the current EP is controlling a valid claim
establish the appropriate variant of EP 930 – Correction of National Quality Error, and
leave a permanent VBMS note explaining why the EP 930 is being established and associate the note with the EP 930.
has not been received
is still pending
change the invalid EP to the appropriate variant of EP 930 – Correction of National Quality Error.

has been cleared
establish the appropriate variant of EP 930 – Correction of National Quality Error, and
leave a permanent VBMS note explaining why the EP 930 is being established and associate the note with the EP 930.
 
Note:  For corrections identified at the RO level, use the appropriate variant of EP 930 - Correction of Local Quality Error.
 
Reference:  For more information on associating a permanent note to an EP, see 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.c, and
the VBMS Core User Guide.
5
Make two attempts in a 24-hour period to contact the claimant and/or authorized representative and provide the information in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.1.b.  
Does the claimant have an authorized representative?
If yes, call, e-mail, or if co-located at the RO, meet the authorized representative in person.
If no, call the claimant.
If attempts to contact are
successful, wait two business days for receipt of the complete claim on a prescribed form, then go to the next step, or
unsuccessful, go to Step 7.
Important:  All successful telephone or in-person contact must be documented on VA Form 27-0820 and included in the claims folder.  All e-mail correspondence must be included in the claims folder.
6
Review the claimant’s record to determine if a complete claim has been received in response to the actions taken in Step 5.
 
If a complete claim ...
Then ...
has been received for the issues or conditions previously submitted on correspondence other than a prescribed form
update the EP 930 contention list with the issues/conditions
edit the DOCUMENT PROPERTIES and change the SUBJECT of the claim document to response to Incorrect Claim Establishment, and
clear the EP 930.  No further action is required for addressing the incorrect claims.
has been received for the issues or conditions previously submitted on correspondence other than a prescribed form and includes
new issues or contentions
update the EP 930 contention list with the issues/conditions
edit the DOCUMENT PROPERTIES and change the SUBJECT of the claim document to response to Incorrect Claim Establishment with new issues
process the new issues or conditions under the appropriate EP, establishing one if necessary, and
clear the EP 930.  No further action is required for addressing the incorrect claims.
has not been received
go to Step 7.
 
7
Create the Incorrectly Adjudicated Claim letter, and
attach the required form(s) 
send the letter to the claimant, and
clear the EP 930.


II.iii.2.E.2.d.  Instructions for Addressing Incorrectly Established Contentions on a Valid EP When a Decision Has Not Been Made

Follow the steps in the table below to address requests for benefits that were incorrectly added to a valid EP and a decision has not been made.
 
Step
Action
1
Review the claimant’s record to determine whether an active ITF (for the same general benefit as the incorrectly established claim) was pending prior to the incorrect establishment of the EP.
Was an active ITF pending?
If yes,
ensure that the ITF status is correctly reflected in the claimant corporate record
submit requests to correct an ITF status to ESD, and
go to Step 3. 
If no, go to Step 2.
References:  For more information on
an ITF status, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.d, and
requesting correction of incorrect ITF data, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.c and d.
2
Determine how VA received the request for benefits.  If the request for benefits was received through
CM, go to Step 3, or
telephone or in-person contact with a VA representative,
establish an ITF effective the date of the contact, and
go to Step 3.
3
Remove the issues or conditions from the pending EP and establish EP 400 - General Correspondence to track the actions taken in Steps 4 and 5.
4
Make two attempts in a 24-hour period to contact the claimant and/or authorized representative and provide the information in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.1.b. 
Does the claimant have an authorized representative?
If yes, call, e-mail, or if co-located at the RO, meet the authorized representative in person.
If no, call the claimant.
If attempts to contact are
successful, wait two business days for receipt of the complete claim, then go to the next step, or
unsuccessful, go to the next step.
Important:  All successful telephone or in-person contact must be documented on VA Form 27-0820 and included in the claims folder.  All e-mail correspondence must be included in the claims folder.
5
Has a complete claim for the previously identified issues or conditions been received?
If yes,
add the issues or conditions to the pending rating EP, and
continue processing the claim.
If no,
send the Incorrectly Established Claim letter, and
clear the EP 400.
 

II.iii.2.E.2.e.  Instructions for Addressing Incorrectly Established Contentions on a Valid EP When a Decision Has Been Made

Follow the steps in the table below to address requests for benefits that were incorrectly added to a valid EP and a decision was made. 
 
Step
Action
1
Review the claimant’s record to determine whether an active ITF (for the same general benefit as the incorrectly established claim) was pending prior to the incorrect establishment of the EP.
Was an active ITF pending?
If yes,
ensure that the ITF status is correctly reflected in the claimant corporate record
submit requests to correct an ITF status to ESD, and
go to Step 3. 
If no, go to Step 2. 
References:  For more information on
an ITF status, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.d, and
requesting correction of incorrect ITF data, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.c and d.
2
Determine how VA received the request for benefits.  
If the request for benefits was received through
CM, go to Step 3, or
telephone or in-person contact with a VA representative,
establish an ITF effective the date of the contact, and
go to Step 3.
3
Has the rating decision that addressed the incorrectly added contention(s) been promulgated and authorized?
If yes, go to Step 4.
If no,
return the case to the rating activity, and
the rating activity will
pull the rating back into VBMS-R for corrections
delete the issues that were invalid to ensure the conditions are removed from the master record
return the rating with update
follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.B.2.b to request deletion of the rating decision Narrative and Codesheet, and
route the case to the development activity to complete the actions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2.b beginning with Step 3.
4
Make two attempts in a 24-hour period to contact the claimant and/or authorized representative and provide the information in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.1.b.
Does the claimant have an authorized representative?
If yes, call, e-mail, or if co-located at the RO, meet the authorized representative in person.
If no, call the claimant.
If attempts to contact are
successful, wait two business days for receipt of the complete claim on a prescribed form, then go to the next step, or
unsuccessful, go to Step 7.
Important:  All successful telephone or in-person contact must be documented on VA Form 27-0820 and included in the claims folder.  All e-mail correspondence must be included in the claims folder.
5
Review the claimant’s record to determine if a complete claim on a prescribed form has been received and the valid EP the issues or conditions were erroneously adjudicated under is still pending.
 
If a complete claim ...
and the valid EP …
Then ...
has been received
is still pending
add the issues or conditions back onto the EP
finish development of the complete claim as needed, and
go to Step 6.

has been cleared and the current EP has been established to control the receipt of the complete claim resulting from the actions in Step 4
change the EP to the appropriate variant of EP 930 – Correction of National Quality Error, and
leave a permanent VBMS note explaining why the EP is being changed to EP 930 and associate the note with the EP 930.
has not been received
is still pending
go to Step 6.

has been cleared
establish the appropriate variant of EP 930 – Correction of National Quality Error, and
leave a permanent VBMS note explaining why the EP 930 is being established and associate the note with the EP 930.
 
Note:  For corrections identified at the RO level, use the appropriate variant of EP 930 - Correction of Local Quality Error.
 
Reference:  For more information on associating a permanent note to an EP, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.c.
6
Review the claimant’s record to determine if a complete claim has been received in response to the actions taken in Step 4.
 
If a complete claim ...
Then ...
has been received for the issues or conditions previously submitted on correspondence other than a prescribed form
update the EP 930 contention list with the issues/conditions
edit the DOCUMENT PROPERTIES and change the SUBJECT of the claim document to response to Incorrect Claim Establishment, and
clear the EP 930.  No further action is required for addressing the incorrect claims.
has been received for the issues or conditions previously submitted on correspondence other than a prescribed form and includes
new issues or contentions
update the EP 930 contention list with the issues/conditions
edit the DOCUMENT PROPERTIES and change the SUBJECT of the claim document to response to Incorrect Claim Establishment with new issues
process the new issues or conditions under the appropriate EP, establishing one if necessary, and
clear the EP 930.  No further action is required for addressing the incorrect claims.
has not been received
go to Step 7.

7
Create the Incorrectly Adjudicated Claim letter, and
attach the required form(s)
send the letter to the claimant, and
clear the EP 930.
8
If a claim is 
received, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.3.a, or
not received, no further action is required. 
Note:  When a claimant fails to submit the prescribed form solicited in Step 7, do not take further action to revise any claim or issue that was decided without the proper submission of a prescribed claim form.  Specifically, no further action is necessary to sever service connection or otherwise revise the prior decision unless the decision was otherwise erroneous.


II.iii.2.E.2.f.  Disagreements Received on Incorrectly Added and Decided Claims

When a claimant has been notified of a decision, even when the decision was made without the claim having been submitted on a required prescribed form, accept any timely and otherwise appropriately submitted legacy appeal or decision review request on the decision. 
 
References:  For more information on
legacy appeals, see M21-5, Chapter 7, and
decision review options, see 38 CFR 3.2500.

   
3.  Receipt of Claims in Response to Incorrectly Established Claims Procedures
  

Change Date

June 24, 2021

II.iii.2.E.3.a.  Receipt of a Prescribed Form in Response to Incorrect Claims Guidance After the EP 930 Has Been Cleared

When an RO receives a prescribed form in response to the incorrectly established claims guidance provided by M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.E.2 and the corrective EP 930 has already been cleared, the claims processor must determine if the EP established upon receipt of the form is still required.
 
If the prescribed form lists …
Then ...
only the issues or conditions previously submitted on correspondence other than a prescribed form
edit the DOCUMENT PROPERTIES and change the SUBJECT of the claim document to response to Incorrect Claim Establishment
leave a permanent note in VBMS indicating that the form was received in response to incorrect claim establishment guidance and no adjudication action is required, and
cancel the tracking EP.
new issues or contentions
edit the DOCUMENT PROPERTIES and change the SUBJECT of the claim document to response to Incorrect Claim Establishment with new issues
leave a permanent note in VBMS indicating that the form was received in response to incorrect claim establishment guidance but contains new issues or conditions for adjudication, and
process the new issues or conditions under the appropriate EP.
  
Important:  Claims processors may be able to identify these forms by the phrase RO Request – Signature Needed written at the top of each page, however, not every form will state this.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section F - Withdrawal of Initial Claims
Article ID: 554400000174878
Updated Dec 18, 2025

<-- Previous Section   Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Requests to Withdraw an Initial Claim
2
Considering the Factors That Affect the Way the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Processes a Request for Withdrawal of an Initial Claim
3
Processing a Timely Received Request That VA Associates With the Claims Folder Before Issuing a Decision Notice
4
Processing a Retraction of a Request to Withdraw an Initial Claim


 
1.  Requests to Withdraw an Initial Claim  

Introduction
 
This topic contains general information about receiving a claimant’s request to withdraw a pending initial claim, including
who may withdraw an initial claim and what types of claims may be withdrawn
acceptable means for requesting withdrawal of a claim
requests for claim withdrawal in exam cancellations
timeliness requirement for submitting a request to withdraw a claim
effect of the withdrawal of a claim
claimant’s right to retract a request to withdraw a claim, and
example of the effect that withdrawal of a claim has on a claim that VA ultimately grants.

Change Date

August 23, 2022

II.iii.2.F.1.a.  Who May Withdraw an Initial Claim and What Types of Claims May Be Withdrawn
 
A claimant or a claimant’s authorized representative may withdraw any type of initial claim that is before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), to include a claim for
disability compensation
Veterans Pension
additional benefits for dependents
survivors benefits, or
an apportionment of benefits. 
Important:  The procedures reflected in this section apply to initial claims only.
References:  For more information on the withdrawal of
claims, see
Hanson v. Brown, 9 Vet.App. 29 (1996), and
Delisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 45 (2011)
decision reviews (including higher-level reviews (HLRs) and supplemental claims), see
38 CFR 3.2500(d), and
M21-5, Chapter 4, Topic 4
appeals under the jurisdiction of the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA), see 
38 CFR 20.205, and
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section A.3.e, and
legacy appeals, see
38 CFR 19.55, and
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section A.3.

II.iii.2.F.1.b.  Acceptable Means for Requesting Withdrawal of a Claim
 
There is no prescribed form for withdrawing a claim.  VA accepts requests for withdrawal of a claim that a claimant or authorized representative submits
in writing (a signed statement)
orally (in person or by telephone), or
electronically.
The request must contain enough information to identify the claim at issue, including the name of the Veteran and claimant (if the claimant is not the Veteran) and the corresponding file number.
 
Important:  Follow the instructions in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.e when accepting a request for withdrawal of a claim by telephone.
 
References:  For more information on
the requirements for withdrawing
decision reviews (including HLRs and supplemental claims), see
38 CFR 3.2500(d), and
M21-5, Chapter 4, Topic 4
appeals under the jurisdiction of BVA, see 
38 CFR 20.205, and 
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section A.3.e, and 
legacy appeals, see 
38 CFR 19.55, and 
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section A.3, and 
VA claim submission service websites, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 4.

II.iii.2.F.1.c.  Requests for Claim Withdrawal in Exam Cancellations

Although a report of examination cancellation from the Veterans Health Administration or a contract examination facility may reflect that an examination was cancelled due to a claimant’s desire to withdraw the claim, this is not an adequate claim withdrawal.  When a report of examination cancellation reflects a claimant’s desire to withdraw a claim, attempt to contact the claimant to clarify intent. 
Attempt to contact the claimant by telephone to clarify 
whether there is intent to withdraw the claim, and
which issue(s) from the pending claim are being withdrawn.
If the claimant cannot be contacted via telephone, send the claimant the Clarification of Intent to Withdraw letter to clarify
whether there is intent to withdraw the claim, and
which issue(s) from the pending claim are being withdrawn. 
Continue processing the claim until the claimant confirms their intent to withdraw the claim either via telephone or in response to the Clarification of Intent to Withdraw letter.  If the claim is ready for decision but the claimant cannot be contacted via telephone, defer making a decision on the claim for 15 days following the date of the Clarification of Intent to Withdraw letter.  If the 15-day waiting period expires and no clarification of intent to withdraw is received, proceed with a decision on the claim.
 
References:  For more information on requirements for 
claims withdrawn via telephone, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.e, and
withdrawing
decision reviews (including higher level reviews and supplemental claims), see
38 CFR 3.2500(d), and
M21-5, Chapter 4, Topic 4
appeals under the jurisdiction of BVA, see 
38 CFR 20.205, and 
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section A.3.e, and 
legacy appeals, see 
38 CFR 19.55, and 
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section A.3. 

II.iii.2.F.1.d.  Timeliness Requirement for Submitting a Request to Withdraw a Claim

A request to withdraw a claim is valid only if VA receives it before issuing a decision notice regarding the same claim.
If VA receives a request for withdrawal of a claim after issuing a decision notice, the claimant must either accept or renounce the benefits payable as a result of VA’s decision.
Note:  Upon receipt of a request for withdrawal of a claim after VA issues a decision notice, follow the instructions in Step 1 of the procedure described in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.2.a.
Reference:  For more information on the renouncement of benefits, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 4.

II.iii.2.F.1.e.  Effect of the Withdrawal of a Claim

Effective the date VA receives a request to withdraw a claim,
the claim ceases to exist
the adjudicatory process with respect to the claim stops, and
VA must treat the claim as if the claimant never filed it.
Important:  If a claimant withdraws a claim, later refiles the same claim, and VA ultimately grants entitlement to the claimed benefit, disregard the date of receipt of the claim that was withdrawn when determining the effective date of entitlement.

II.iii.2.F.1.f.  Claimant's Right to Retract a Request to Withdraw a Claim

A claimant or their authorized representative may retract a request to withdraw a pending claim.  However, a request for retraction is valid only if VA receives it within 30 days of the date VA notified the claimant that it had acted on the claimant’s request for withdrawal of the claim.
Important:
The policy described in the above paragraph applies equally to situations in which VA cancels a claim after erroneously inferring withdrawal of the claim from communication with a claimant.
The policies and principles expressed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.1.b, which discusses requests to withdraw a claim, apply equally to the requests for retraction discussed in this block. 
Reference:  For more information on
the letter VA sends to claimants as notification that VA has acted on a request for withdrawal of a claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.3.c, and
processing a retraction of a request to withdraw a claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.4.a.

II.iii.2.F.1.g.  Example:  Effect That Withdrawal of a Claim Has on a Claim That VA Ultimately Grants

 Scenario: 
On February 5, 2024, VA receives a claim from a Veteran for service connection (SC) for a back disorder. 
On March 14, 2024, before VA decides the Veteran’s claim, VA receives a statement from the Veteran indicating that he wishes to withdraw his claim. 
On April 12, 2024, VA notifies the Veteran by letter that he has successfully withdrawn his claim. 
On September 3, 2024, the Veteran submits another claim for SC for the same back disorder. 
Claims development results in the collection of evidence warranting the establishment of SC for the claimed back disorder.
Result:  VA grants entitlement to SC for the claimed back disorder with an effective date of September 3, 2024. 
 
Rationale:  Although VA ultimately granted the claim it first received from the Veteran on February 5, 2024, that claim ceased to exist when the Veteran withdrew it on March 14, 2024.  The Veteran did not retract his request for withdrawal of the claim within 30 days after VA issued the April 12, 2024, letter.  Accordingly, VA treated that claim as if the Veteran had never filed it.

2.  Considering the Factors That Affect the Way VA Processes a Request for Withdrawal of an Initial Claim
 

Change Date

 August 23, 2022

II.iii.2.F.2.a.  Considering the Factors That Affect the Way VA Processes a Request for Withdrawal

The actions VA takes when processing a request for withdrawal of a claim vary, depending on
whether VA received the request before issuing a decision notice regarding the claim, and
whether the claimant wishes to withdraw all of the contentions associated with the claim.
Upon receipt of a request for withdrawal of a claim, first determine which of the above factors apply to the request.  Then follow the instructions in the table below.
Step
Action
1
Did VA receive the request before issuing a decision notice regarding the claim?
If yes, go to the next step.
If no,
generate the Untimely Claim Withdrawal NotificationLetter
send the letter to the claimant
clear an end product (EP) 400, and
take no further action.
2
Does the claimant wish to withdraw the claim in its entirety (all pending contentions associated with the claim)?
If yes, follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.3.a.
If no, follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.3.b.


3.  Processing a Timely Received Request That VA Associates With the Claims Folder Before Issuing a Decision Notice  

Introduction

This topic contains instructions for processing a timely received request for withdrawal of an initial claim that VA associates with the corresponding claims folder before issuing a decision notice, including
processing a request for withdrawal of an initial claim 
in its entirety, and
when the request does not apply to all pending contentions, and
notifying a claimant that VA has processed a withdrawn claim request.

Change Date

December 18, 2025

II.iii.2.F.3.a.  Processing a Request for Withdrawal of an Initial Claim in Its Entirety
 
Follow the instructions in the table below when
a claimant requests withdrawal of an initial claim in its entirety (all pending contentions associated with the claim), and
VA associates the request with the claims folder before it generates a decision notice regarding the claim.
Important:  
When a claimant requests withdrawal of a claim that involves multiple contentions, the claimant should specify which (if not all) of the individual  contentions the request affects.  If the claimant fails to do so, proceed as if the request applies to all contentions associated with the claim.
If the claimant wishes to withdraw a decision review request, such as a supplemental claim, follow the guidance in M21-5, Chapter 4, Topic 4.
Step
Action
1
Has VA previously processed an award action to either grant or deny benefits for the Veteran?
If yes, go to the next step.
If no, go to Step 3.
2
Were the withdrawn issues previously deferred by rating decision?
If yes,
refer the claim to the rating activity for a record purpose rating to remove the previously deferred issues from the Codesheet, and once complete
go to Step 5.
If no, go to Step 5.
3
When VA has taken no prior award action, process the withdrawal by generating an award through the claims-processing system, according to the instructions in the table below.
Step
Action
1
Click on the ADD button on the BASIC ELIGIBILITY screen.
2
Select Claim Withdrawn from the drop-down box for the DECISION field.
3
Enter the date VA received the request for withdrawal in the EVENT DATE field.
4
Click on the ACCEPT button.
5
Click on the OK button.
Important:  If the actions described in the table above are taken while an award is running, they will have the effect of stopping that award.
4
Route the claim for authorization of the award action.
Reference:  For more information on award processing responsibilities, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.A.2.c.
5
Follow the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.3.c for providing notice of the withdrawn claim.
Reference:  For more information on processing a request to withdraw a claim in the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS), see the VBMS Awards User Guide.

II.iii.2.F.3.b.  Processing a Request for Withdrawal of an Initial Claim When the Request Does Not Apply to All Pending Contentions

Follow the instructions in the table below when
a claimant requests withdrawal of an initial claim with multiple pending contentions
the claimant is not withdrawing the claim in its entirety and has differentiated between which contentions are still active and which contentions they wish to withdraw, and
VA associates the request with the claims folder before it generates a decision notice regarding the claim.
Important:  If the claimant wishes to withdraw a decision review request, such as a supplemental claim, follow the guidance in M21-5, Chapter 4, Topic 4. 
Step
Action
1
Add the following text to the name of each contention listed in VBMS that the claimant withdrew: (withdrawn [Enter the month, day, and year VA received the request for withdrawal])
Go to Step 4.
Example:  back condition (withdrawn 05/22/2025)
Reference:  For more information on editing contentions in VBMS, see the VBMS Core User Guide.
2
Notify the claimant of the action taken by following the instructions in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.3.c.
3
Complete all development actions that are necessary to make a decision on the contentions the claimant did not withdraw.
4
Make a decision on the contentions the claimant did not withdraw.
Important:  If a rating decision is required,
do not include the withdrawn contentions as issues in the rating decision
ensure the withdrawn contentions do not appear on the Codesheet of the rating decision as deferred issues, and
leave a note in the Special Notation box of the rating decision that
provides the date VA received the request for withdrawal, and
lists the contentions the claimant withdrew.
5
Follow the instructions in M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.B for notifying the claimant of the decision.


II.iii.2.F.3.c.  Notifying a Claimant That VA Has Processed a Withdrawn Claim Request

After following the instructions contained in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.3.a or b,
generate the Withdrawal of Claim Letter, and
send the letter to the claimant as notification that
VA has acted on the claimant’s request by cancelling the claim, and
VA may reverse the action it took only if the claimant asks VA to do so within 30 days.
Important: 
If the claim involved multiple contentions, and the claimant differentiated between the contentions to which the request applies and the contentions to which the request does not apply, list the contentions to which the request applies in the Withdrawal of Claim Letter.
There is no requirement (or need) to provide a claimant decision review rights in a Withdrawal of Claim Letter.
If the claimant withdrew all contentions covered by the claim, clear the EP associated with the withdrawn claim, selecting Claim Withdrawn as the reason.

4.﻿  Processing a Retraction of a Request to Withdraw an Initial Claim  

Change Date

May 6, 2016

II.iii.2.F.4.a.  Processing a Retraction of a Request to Withdraw an Initial Claim

Follow the instructions in the table below upon receipt of a retraction of a request to withdraw an initial claim.
Step
Action
1
Did VA receive the retraction within 30 days of the date VA notified the claimant that it had acted on the claimant’s request to withdraw the claim?
If yes, go to the next step.
If no,
notify the claimant that VA could not execute the retraction because the claimant submitted it after the 30-day time limit referenced in this step, and
take no further action.
2
Did VA withdraw the claim based on a misinterpretation of communication from the claimant?
If yes,
reestablish the claim in the claims processing system, using EP 930 with a date of claim corresponding with the date of receipt of the originally received claim, and
go to Step 4.
If no, go to the next step.
3
Re-establish the claim in the claims-processing system, using the appropriate EP.  The EP will be re-established using the date of receipt of the originally received claim.  
 
Important:  Do not establish an EP that is indicative of an original claim, such as an EP 110, 010, 140, 180, or 190, even if the claim that the claimant withdrew was an original claim.
 
Reference:  For more information on selecting an appropriate EP, see M21-4, Appendix B.
4
Complete any outstanding development actions.
5
Make a decision on the claim.
6
Follow the instructions in M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.B for notifying the claimant of the decision.
 
Reference:  For more information on withdrawals and reinstatements of decision review requests, see  M21-5, Chapter 4, Topic 4.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section G - Requests for Application and Claims Solicitation
Article ID: 554400000174879
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
    
Topic
Topic Name
1
Requests for Application
2
Soliciting Claims


 
1.  Requests for Application
  

Change Date

June 21, 2023

II.iii.2.G.1.a.  Requests for Benefits Not Filed on the Prescribed Form on or After March 24, 2015

Consider a request for benefits which was not filed on an appropriate prescribed form on or after March 24, 2015, a request for application.
   
Establish the appropriate end product (EP) with a date of claim as the date the request for application was received.  Generate the appropriate request for application letter. 
   
Reference:  For more information on EPs for requests for application, see M21-4, Appendix B.

   
2.  Soliciting Claims 
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on issues to consider when soliciting claims for disability compensation, including
disabilities for which service connection (SC) must be considered
mere existence of medical records does not constitute a claim
claims mentioning exposure but not specifying a disability
fractures discovered in service treatment records (STRs) without a claim, and
soliciting a claim for a chronic, unclaimed disability.

Change Date

June 1, 2022

II.iii.2.G.2.a.  Disabilities for Which SC Must Be Considered

When deciding an original claim for compensation, or when supplemental service treatment records (STRs) are received following promulgation of an original rating decision, the rating activity must
consider service connection (SC) for all claimed disabilities, based on a sympathetic reading of the claim, and
consider soliciting a claim for other chronic, unclaimed disabilities noted in the STRs.
Exception:  If a claimant or authorized representative submits supplemental STRs, the rating activity must take the actions described in the preceding bullets only ifthe STRs are accompanied by the required standard claim form.
    
References:  For more information on
clarifying claims that are not substantially complete, see 38 CFR 3.159(a)(3)
the definition of and criteria for a substantially complete application, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f
notification requirements for a complete application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C
soliciting a claim for unclaimed disabilities, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2.e
actions to take when supplemental STRs are received, see  M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.B, and
the types of issues that a compensation claim may involve, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.

II.iii.2.G.2.b.  Mere Existence of Medical Records Does Not Constitute a Claim

The mere existence of medical records does not constitute a claim.  There must be some intent by the claimant to apply for a benefit.
   
Notes: 
Claims for an increased rating were previously an exception to that rule under the historical provisions of 38 CFR 3.157(b).
The Standard Claims and Appeals Form regulation eliminated 38 CFR 3.157 and requires submission of claims on prescribed forms effective March 24, 2015.

II.iii.2.G.2.c.  Claims Mentioning Exposure but Not Specifying a Disability

A claim mentioning an exposure but not specifying a disability from the exposure is not substantially complete.
   
Reference:  For more information on claims that do not specify a disability but allege exposure, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.c.

II.iii.2.G.2.d.  Fractures Discovered in STRs Without a Claim

Fractures constitute a chronic disability for the purposes of soliciting a claim. 
 
If the Veteran has not claimed a fracture and STRs contain an x-ray or other objective evidence of a fracture in service, solicit a claim from the Veteran in accordance with M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2.e.
   
Reference:  For more information on SC for fractures documented in service, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.F.1.a.

II.iii.2.G.2.e.  Soliciting a Claim for a Chronic Unclaimed Disability

When soliciting a claim for SC for a chronic, unclaimed disability
send notification to the Veteran and their representative, if applicable, instructing them to submit a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application For Disability Compensation And Related Compensation Benefits, if they would like to file a claim for the identified condition(s), and
provide the Veteran and their representative, if applicable, information regarding how to obtain the appropriate form for claim submission.
Include the following language in the notification:
   
We have reviewed your records and they suggest you may be entitled to an additional benefit.  If you want to file a claim for [insert chronic disability] please submit a completed VA Form 21-526EZ, Application For Disability Compensation And Related Compensation Benefits, to the appropriate address listed on the attached Where to Send Your Written Correspondence chart.  You can download the form at http://www.va.gov/vaforms or submit your claim online at www.va.gov.  We recommend you return the form as soon as you can in order to ensure the earliest possible payment date if an award is authorized.
 
Notes: 
Claims processors may combine the claim solicitation notice with other types of correspondence or decision notices being sent to the Veteran.
Do not establish EP control or initiate development or duty-to-notify/assist procedures until the Veteran responds affirmatively to the notice.
When the Veteran responds with a claim, the date of claim of the EP is the date the regional office receives the claim.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, Chapter 3, Section A - Claims Establishment
Article ID: 554400000174881
Updated Aug 22, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview  

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Establishing Claims in the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) and Share
2
Establishing a Request for a Hearing
3
Centralized Mail (CM) Automatic Claim Establishment


 
1.  Establishing Claims in VBMS and Share 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about establishing claims, including
types of claims excluded from establishment in VBMS
preparing for claims establishment
determining the end product (EP) for initial rating-related claims, and
establishing claims in 
VBMS, and
Share.

Change Date
 
August 22, 2025

II.iii.3.A.1.a.  Types of Claims Excluded From Establishment in VBMS
 
The Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) is used to establish
all initial claims for compensation
pension and survivor claims
claims where the claimant has a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)-appointed fiduciary, and
most claim types for which a VBMS record already exists.
Exceptions:  The following claims should be established using Share:
any claim where the claimant is an organization, unless the organization is a state cemetery, and
discovered legacy appeals where the appellant is not a child, spouse, or parent of the Veteran.
Reference:  For more information on end product (EP) codes for compensation, pension, and fiduciary operations, see M21-4, Appendix B, 2.

II.iii.3.A.1.b.  Preparing for Claims Establishment
 
The table below describes the steps of claims establishment and the references for guidance on these actions.
Step
Action
Reference
1
Check for a previously established claims folder number.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.c.
2
Determine the current claims folder location and request scanning of paper claims folders (if necessary).
M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.d, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.f.
3
Review the VBMS exclusions to determine the system in which to place the claim under control.
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A.1.a.
4
Place EP under control using the appropriate system.
For
VBMS, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A.1.d, and
Share, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A.1.e.
Important:  
Establish EP control only upon receipt of a substantially completed form.
Most pension and survivor claims should now be established in VBMS, as indicated in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A.1.a.
Military service information, such as branch of service and date of release from active duty for a service member’s current period of service must be updated in VBMS before establishment of any pre-discharge claim.  
References:  For more information on 
the types of claims excluded from establishment in VBMS, see the exceptions listed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A.1.a
handling an incomplete claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C
processing an intent to file (ITF) and incomplete ITFs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A
general description of a pre-discharge claim, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 6.A.1.a, and
updating military service information, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.B.3.

II.iii.3.A.1.c.  Determining the EP for Initial Rating-Related Claims
 
To administer proper EP control for rating-related claims, determine if the claimant
previously filed for benefits, or
is filing an original claim (first initial claim).
Follow the steps in the table below to determine the appropriate EP for rating-related claims.
 
Step
Action
1
Open Share and select the CORPORATE INQUIRY command..
2
Enter the claimant’s Social Security number (SSN) or claims folder number into the FILE NUMBER OR SSN field and click the SUBMIT button.
3
Click on the AWARD/RATING box in the menu bar and navigate to the RATING INFORMATION tab.  Has the claimant previously received a rating determination?
If yes, go to the next step.
If no, go to Step 5.
4
Determine if any of the claimed issues have been previously denied.  For each issue that has been previously denied, follow request for application procedures located in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.1before going to the next step.
 
Important: 
If the claim for a previously denied issue is received on VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request – Supplemental Claim, route it to the decision review operations center mail queue, where it will be processed as provided in M21-5, Chapter 4, 2.
If all the claimed issues have previously been denied, no further action in this table is required.
5
Click the READY button to return to the main Share screen.
Select the Beneficiary Identification & Records Locator Subsystem (BIRLS) INQUIRY command and click the SUBMIT button.
6
Select the INACTIVE COMP & PEN tab.
 
Determine if there any entries in the
DIAGNOSTIC table
ENTITLEMENT CODE field, or
Reason for Termination or Disallowance field.
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Termination.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
If entries ...
Then use ...
exist
a rating EP from the 020 series.
do not exist
an original rating EP from the
110 series, if there are seven or fewer claimed contentions, or
010 series, if there are eight or more claimed contentions.
 
 
References:  For more information on
establishing and maintaining EP control, see M21-4, Appendix B, 1.b, and
available EP codes for compensation, pension, and fiduciary operations, see M21-4, Appendix B, 2.

II.iii.3.A.1.d.  Establishing Claims in VBMS
 
Follow the steps in the table below to establish a claim in VBMS.
 
Step
Action
1
Navigate to the Veteran’s profile and select New Claim from the ACTIONS drop-down menu.
2
On the NEW CLAIM screen verify the following:
the claimant’s first and last names are correct
the CONTACT INFORMATION field is current, including the
address
telephone number, and
e-mail, and
check for open claims in the EXISTING CLAIMS field.
Notes:  
If a rating claim is already pending
update the contentions, and
manage evidence.
Contact information updates must be made using the EDIT VETERAN function, as indicated in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.B.1.b.
3
Complete the required CLAIM INFORMATION fields (indicated by red asterisk), all applicable optional fields, and click SUBMIT.  
4
For certain EPs, VBMS will ask if the claim was submitted on a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, dated August 2011 or later.
If no is selected, a Section 5103 notice will generate and must be sent to the claimant.
If yes is selected, VBMS will transition to the CONTENTIONS screen.
5
Enter the claimant’s contentions, completing the required fields as described in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.F.2.
6
Use the table below to document the claims establishment process.
 
If processing the mail in a(n) ...
Then ...
paper format
annotate the claim document with the
EP
establishment date, and
initials of the individual establishing the EP.
electronic format
an annotation is not required, but the creation of a VBMS note documenting the EP established is recommended.
 
7
Return to the VETERAN PROFILE screen and select Manage Evidencein the ACTIONS drop-down menu.
 
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Manage_Evidence.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
 
8
Add each piece of mail or mail packet by
selecting the ADD unsolicited tab
entering the required information and clicking the ADD EVIDENCE button, repeating until all evidence has been entered, and
selecting COMPLETE.
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III.ii.3.D.2.c_step10.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
References:  For more information on
establishing claims in VBMS, see the VBMS Core User Guide
pre-discharge claims establishment, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 6.B.2
how claims folders and numbers are established, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.b
processing power of attorney (POA) appointments, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1
date of claim regarding
ITF, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A 
informal claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H
original claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.c
correct date of claim, see M21-4, Appendix B, 1.c
definition of date of receipt, see 38 CFR 3.1(r)
identifying date of receipt, to include documents received in the Centralized Mail (CM) portal, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.1, and
pre-discharge claim date of claim, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 6.B.2
adding unsolicited mail, see the VBMS Core User Guide
processing name change requests, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.B.2, and
receiving notice of a change of contact information or direct deposit, see 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.B.1.a and b, and
M27-1, Part I, 3.10.

II.iii.3.A.1.e.  Establishing Claims in Share

Follow the steps in the table below to establish a claim in Share.
 
Step
Action
1
Does a BIRLS record exist?
If yes, go to the next step.
If no,
follow guidance in M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.c to ensure a duplicate record would not be created
create a record using the BIRLS ADD command, and
go to the next step.
2
Select the CLAIMS ESTABLISHMENT C+P command on the Share READY screen and using the table below, submit the information needed to start the claims establishment process in Share.
 
Required Fields
Optional
FILE NUMBER
MIDDLE NAME AND SUFFIX
BENEFIT TYPE
DATE OF BIRTH
PAYEE NUMBER
SERVICE NUMBER
CLAIM TYPE
BRANCH OF SERVICE 
FIRST NAME
EOD AND RAD
LAST NAME
REGIONAL OFFICE
 
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Share_Ready.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
Note:  The command establishes an EP for a pending claim or appeal.
3
Complete the following actions while on the VETERAN'S IDENTIFICATION DATA screen:
review the data for accuracy and completeness
correct any erroneous data and enter any missing data, and
select CONTINUE ESTABLISHMENT.
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Share_CEST.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
4
Using the table below to complete the PENDING ISSUE/CORPORATE CONTROL ESTABLISHMENT screen.
 
Field Name
Description
INCREMENTAL
Select a third digit incremental/modifier other than zero, if the claim meets the criteria outlined in M21-4, Appendix B, 1.f.
 
Note:  The default third digit incremental (also called a modifier) is zero.  
ADDRESS
TELEPHONE, and
EMAIL
Update based on current correspondence (as necessary).
DATE OF CLAIM
For claims establishment purposes, the date of claim is the earliest date of receipt in any VA facility, to include scanning vendor sites and through VA claims submission service websites.  Identify this date from the earliest VA date stamp or equivalent.
SUSPENSE DATE
Set suspense date to 15 days from the current date.
SECTION/UNIT
Enter 21 for compensation and pension claims.
POWER OF ATTORNEY SEARCH
AUTHORIZED POA ACCESS, and
CADD AUTH'D
Update POA information (if applicable).
 
SUPPRESS ACKNOWLEDGEMENT LETTER
Ensure the SUPRESS ACKNOWLEDGEMENT LETTER field is deselected. 

5
Select CREATE ESTABLISHMENT.
6
Update any appropriate corporate flashes, as required by M21-4, Appendix E.
7
Open the Veteran’s record in VBMS and from the CLAIMS drop-down menu select Claim Established in Share. 
8
Enter the Veteran’s claimed contentions, completing the required fields as described in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.F.2.
9
Return to the VETERAN PROFILE screen.
Select Manage Evidence in the ACTIONS drop-down menu.
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Manage_Evidence_2.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
10
Add each piece of mail or mail packet by 
selecting the ADD unsolicited tab
entering the required information and clicking the ADD EVIDENCE button, repeating until all evidence has been entered, and
selecting COMPLETE.
Example: INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Manage_Evidence_3.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
11
Use the table below to document the claims establishment process.
 
If processing the mail in a(n) ...
Then ...
paper format
annotate the claim document with the
EP
establishment date, and
initials of the individual establishing the EP.
electronic format
an annotation is not required, but the creation of a VBMS note documenting the EP established is recommended.

12
Route for scanning to appropriate location.
 
Important: 
Establish EP control only upon receipt of a fully completed claim.
The Veterans Appeal Control and Locator System (VACOLS) must be checked to determine if the contentions claimed, if applicable, are controlled under an active appeal.
Most pension and survivor claims should now be established in VBMS, as indicated in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A.1.a.
Note:  A BIRLS record exists for each Veteran or other beneficiary for whom one of the following types of files has been established:
CLAIMS
NOD
CH 35
VR&E, and
CH 30.
References:  For more information on
the types of claims excluded from establishment in VBMS, see the exceptions listed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.A.1.a
processing an ITF and incomplete ITFs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A
determining if a scanning request is necessary, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.f
how claims folders and numbers are established, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.b
confirming a BIRLS record exists and BIRLS ADD, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.c and d, and
the Share User Guide
controlling legacy appeals and determining if claimed contentions are controlled under an active legacy appeal, see M21-5, Chapter 6, Section B
date of claim regarding  
ITF, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A
informal claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H
correct date of claim, see 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.c, and
M21-4, Appendix B, 1.c
definition of date of receipt, see 38 CFR 3.1(r)
identifying date of receipt, to include documents received in the CM portal, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.1, and
pre-discharge claims, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 6.B.2
processing POA appointments, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.1
updating electronic systems for POA, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.2
POA codes, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.C.3
updating corporate flashes, see the Share User Guide, and
processing unsolicited mail, see the VBMS Core User Guide.

2.  Establishing a Request for a Hearing
 

Change Date

November 30, 2020

II.iii.3.A.2.a.  Establishing Requests for a Hearing

Upon request, a claimant is entitled to a hearing on any issue involved in a claim.
 
Follow the steps below to control a request for a hearing by adding a special issue indicator and tracked items in VBMS.
 
Step
Action
1
Open the claimant’s profile in VBMS, and
select New Claim from the ACTIONS drop-down menu.
2
When necessary, update the claimant’s information, including
address
telephone number, and
POA.
3
Determine if the hearing is for a legacy appeal or pending claim.
  
If the hearing is for …
Then …
a pending legacy appeal
select the EP 170, and
add the Local Hearing special issue indicator to each contention that requires a hearing.
a legacy appeal that has not been established
establish EP 170, and
add the Local Hearing special issue indicator to each contention that requires a hearing.
a pending claim
select the EP controlling the issue that requires the hearing, and
add the Local Hearing special issue indicator to each contention that requires the hearing.
an issue that is no longer pending as part of a legacy appeal or claim
follow request for application procedures located in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.  No further action in this table is required.
 
4
Add a tracked item that corresponds to the type of hearing request with a one-day suspense period.
5
Add a note providing details of the hearing request using the following format:
 
[Type of hearing (informal, DRO, pre-decisional, etc.)] hearing request via [method of request (phone call, written correspondence, on VA Form 21-0958, etc.)] received on [date request was received].
6
From the PROFILE screen, select Manage Evidence in the ACTIONS drop-down menu.
 
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Manage_Evidence_6.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
7
Add each piece of mail or mail packet by
selecting the ADD unsolicited tab
entering the required information and clicking the ADD EVIDENCE button, repeating until all evidence has been entered, and
selecting COMPLETE.
Example: INCLUDEPICTURE "https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/img/M21-1_III_ii_3_SecD_Manage_Evidence_7.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
Note:  Legacy appeals-related hearing information must also be input in VACOLS.
 
References:  For more information on 
regional office (RO) hearings, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.D
informal conferences/hearings, see
M21-5, Chapter 5, 3
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section C.5, and
38 CFR 3.2600
VACOLS review and updates, see M21-5, Chapter 6, Section A.1.d
adding special issue indicators to a contention, see the VBMS Core User Guide
creating tracked items, see the VBMS Core User Guide
the appropriate tracked item for hearing requests, see M21-4, Appendix D, 1.b, and
managing unsolicited mail, see the VBMS Core User Guide.

 
 
3.  CM Automatic Claim Establishment

Introduction

This topic contains information about CM automatic claim establishment, including
Auto-Establish process
Auto-Establish functionality
exclusions to the Auto-Establish process
identifying Auto-Establish claims, and
reporting consistent errors with Auto-Establish claims. 

Change Date

August 22, 2025

II.iii.3.A.3.a.  Auto-Establish Process

Auto-Establish is an automatic process taking traditional paper compensation claims filed on VA Form 21-526EZ that have been received and scanned into the CM portal and
extracting data from the form, and
automatically establishing the claim in VBMS.
Note:  A claim submitted on VA Form 21-526EZ to the CM portal using the Direct Upload tool will also go through the Auto-Establish process. 

II.iii.3.A.3.b.  Auto-Establish Functionality

A VA Form 21-526EZ that arrives at the CM vendor is scanned and the data fields are extracted.  The data is used to
establish an appropriate EP
list contentions
add special issue indicators and corporate flashes, and
manage the evidence list that is displayed in VBMS.
The VA Form 21-526EZ and all mail received with the form are uploaded to the claimant’s electronic claims folder (eFolder).
 
Note:  Auto-Establish will assign the claim to a segmented lane by adding the associated lane’s special issue indicator to the first contention on the EP. 

II.iii.3.A.3.c.  Exclusions to the Auto-Establish Process

Auto-Establish will establish the majority of compensation claims submitted on VA Form 21-526EZ.  When a claim submitted on VA Form 21-526EZ cannot be automatically established, it will remain in the CM portal for manual processing.
 
Some factors that will require a claim to be manually established include:
incomplete VA Form 21-526EZ
duplicate records or claims folders for the Veteran
system unavailability, and
submitting a claim with VA Form 21-22, Appointment of Veterans Service Organization as Claimant's Representative, or VA Form 21-22a, Appointment of Individual as Claimant's Representative.
References:  For more information on
duplicate records consolidation, see M21-1, Part XIV, 6.3, and
identifying and handling incomplete applications, see 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.

II.iii.3.A.3.d.  Identifying Auto-Establish Claims

Auto-Establish claims have three attribute categories that can be used to identify them.  One attribute from each category will be present on an Auto-Establish claim.
Exception:  The name of the scanning vendor, SMS, will always appear as both the SYSTEM SOURCE and UPLOADING USER ROLE.
 
Utilize the table below to identify the possible attributes in each category. 
 
Category
Examples
Date stamp
Claim forms can be submitted by sending paper documents to the intake facility or by submitting electronic documents using the Direct Upload tool.  Auto-Establish claim forms will bear one of two distinct date stamps depending on the method of submission. 
 
Example:  Below is an example of a date stamp placed on a paper form that has been digitally scanned.
 
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III.ii.3.D.7.d_datestamp1.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
 
Example:  Below is an example of a date stamp placed on a document submitted using the Direct Upload tool.
 
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III.ii.3.D.7.d_datestamp2.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
  
Claim label
An Auto-Establish claim will use one of the following claim labels:
110 - D2D-Initial Live Comp <8 Issues (110)
010 - D2D-Initiatial Live Comp >8 Issues (110)
020 - D2D-Supplemental, or
400 - D2D-Supplemental.
System source / Uploading user role
Example:  Below is an example of an Auto-Establish claims form in the eFolder.
 
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III.ii.3.D.7.d_autoestablish.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET  
 
Example:  Below is an example of the document properties screen of an Auto-Establish claims form.
 
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III.ii.3.D.7.d_docproperties.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
 

II.iii.3.A.3.e.  Reporting Consistent Errors With Auto-Establish Claims

Notify RO leadership and the District Director when consistent new errors with Auto-Establish claims (such as an incorrect corporate flash being applied to a homeless claim) are identified.
 
The RO Director will forward the e-mail to the Office of Field Operations mailboxwith a request to expedite the resolution of the issue. 
 
All reports must
include 
example file numbers
a description of the issue, and
the information technology ticket number, and
be sent via encrypted e-mail.
Important:  When reporting an issue, the Enterprise Service Desk ticket must include the following information in the body of the ticket:
the phrase #automail – Issue with Mail Automation Services, and
necessary information to troubleshoot the error, including 
Veteran record information
VBMS claim identification (ID) number
CM packet ID, and
any other information that will help correctly identify the error under review.   
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, Chapter 2, Section F - Failure to Report and Rescheduling Examinations
Article ID: 554400000180508
Updated May 27, 2025

 <-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

 This section contains the following topics:
  
Topic
Topic Name
1
Handling Failure to Report for a Scheduled Examination
2
Protocol for Scheduling Examinations Using the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) RSVP Scheduling Program


1.  Handling Failure to Report for a Scheduled Examination
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on handling a Veteran’s failure to report for a scheduled examination, including 
effect of non-cooperation on the duty to provide an examination or opinion
definition of good cause
review of returned mail notifying the Veteran of a scheduled examination
action taken after attempting to locate a better address
allegations of non-receipt of scheduling notice, and
initial scheduling problems and rescheduling examinations.

Change Date

August 7, 2023

IV.i.2.F.1.a.   Effect of Non-Cooperation on the Duty to Provide an Examination or Opinion

While the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is obligated under 38 CFR 3.159(c)(4) to provide medical examinations or obtain medical opinions to assist in substantiating claims, the claimant must cooperate by reporting for such examination. 
 
38 CFR 3.655 provides that when entitlement or continued entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination and the claimant fails to report without good cause, action will be taken as provided in 38 CFR 3.655(b) and (c).  See the table below for a summary of the actions to take.
 
If the failure to report for examination without good cause is in connection with a(n) ...
Then ...
original compensation claim, or
new claim (for a new benefit or new disability)
decide the claim based on the evidence of record.
increased evaluation claim
supplemental claim for a previously denied benefit, or
original claim for a benefit other than compensation
deny the claim.
examination ordered to assess continuing entitlement when there is a running award
 
discontinue payment for the benefit, or
reduce payment for the disability for which examination was scheduled to a
minimum evaluation established under 38 CFR Part 4, or
lower protected evaluation under 38 CFR 3.951(b). 
Notes: 
Discontinuance or reduction is only finalized after due process, as provided in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 2.B.
Reduction or discontinuance will not be finalized when the claimant submits evidence during the proposed reduction period justifying continuation of the benefit or indicates a willingness to report for examination. 
 
Important:
For the purpose of the table above, the phrase without good causemeans that good cause for a claimant’s failure to report (defined in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.b) was not provided before a decision was issued in the claim for which the examination was necessary. 
Documentation supporting the good cause offered is generally not required.
Although M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.f provides that good cause must be accepted at any time before a decision is issued, in cases of repeated(two or more) failures to attend a VA examination, proceed with a decision on the claim.  Clear rationale for rejecting an offer of good cause must be included in the rating narrative.
Note:  If the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) attempted to schedule the exam under their RSVP program, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.2.
 
References:  For more information on
allegations of non-receipt of a notice that an examination was scheduled, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.e, and
initial scheduling problems and rescheduling examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.f.

IV.i.2.F.1.b.  Definition:  Good Cause

Good cause means a reason that justifies failure to report for VA examination. 
 
VA will generally accept any reason offered by the individual as good cause for failure to report for an exam.  Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, illness or hospitalization of the claimant or death of an immediate family member.  
 
Exception:  Good cause is not established if the claimant
fails to provide any reason for failing to report
indicates failure to report was based on general concerns about being exposed to and/or contracting an illness while undergoing examination, or
indicates notice of the scheduled examination was not received.
References:  For more information on
effect of non-cooperation on the duty to provide an examination or opinion, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.a
allegations of non-receipt of examination notice, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.e, and
cases where a claimant expresses a willingness to report for examination, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.f.

IV.i.2.F.1.c.  Review of Returned Mail Notifying the Veteran of a Scheduled Examination

Regional offices (ROs) have the duty to ensure that examination notices are sent to the proper address in all situations, including during the traditional claims process as well as when associated with the scheduling of routine future examinations.  If a VA medical facility advises that mail notifying a Veteran of a scheduled VA examination has been returned because the Postal Service reported the letter was undeliverable at the address provided, review the claims folder to determine whether
the mail was erroneously addressed
a more recent address is of record, or
a valid address is available from non-VA sources, such as the Internet or telephone directory assistance.  
Notes: 
VA is authorized to use the Internet address locator service CLEAR (https://clear.thomsonreuters.com/clear_home/index.jsp) to obtain current address information for claimants.
If the Veteran receives VA benefits via direct deposit/electronic funds transfer, send a letter to the Veteran’s financial institution asking for a current mailing address. 
Reference:  For more information on using the CLEAR service, see the CLEAR Quick-Start Training Guide and Reference Manual.

IV.i.2.F.1.d.Action Taken After Attempting to Locate a Better Address

When notification is received from a VA medical facility that an examination could not be scheduled due to notice that was undeliverable at the address provided, use the table below to determine the action to take after attempting to locate a better address.
 
If a better address is …
Then ...
identified
provide the new address to the VA medical facility
request that the VA medical facility
reschedule the examination, and
notify the Veteran at the new address of the pending examination, and
update the corporate record.
not identified
proceed with failure to report analysis under 38 CFR 3.655.
    

IV.i.2.F.1.e.  Allegations of Non-Receipt of Scheduling Notice

A Veteran’s allegation that notice of a scheduled VA examination was not received is not considered good cause for failure to report. 
 
An assertion that a notice was not received does not rebut the presumption of administrative regularity that VA discharged its duty to schedule an examination and notify the Veteran of the scheduled examination. 
 
A copy of an examination scheduling notice from the examining facility does not need to appear in the claims folder for the presumption of regularity to apply. 
 
If evidence is available that rebuts the presumption of regularity, such as the failure of VA to timely update the claimant’s address or an assertion that the exam notice was received after the date of the examination, then that evidence must be considered.
 
References:  For more information on
allegations of non-receipt of a scheduling notice, see Kyhn v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 228 (2011)
effect of non-cooperation on the duty to provide an examination or opinion, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.a, and
the definition of good cause, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.b.

IV.i.2.F.1.f.  Initial Scheduling Problems and Rescheduling Examinations

Consider the following guidance on how duty to assist concepts and principles apply when there is
a delay or other problems with the medical provider initially scheduling an examination, or
the claimant fails to report to a scheduled examination and thereafter
offers good cause, or
expresses a willingness to attend a previously missed exam. 
Notes:  
Known impediments to scheduling an examination will generally be resolved by the provider and claimant in advance of the scheduled examination date.  This may result in delay of the examination to another date, but is not considered a failure to report and does not implicate claimant non-cooperation with the duty to assist. 
When notification is received from a VA medical facility that an examination could not be scheduled because a scheduling notice mailed to the claimant’s address of record was returned as undeliverable, take action as specified in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.c and d.  When the claimant’s correct address is subsequently located, request that the medical facility reschedule the examination. 
If an examinee fails to report for a scheduled examination but offers good cause on or after the examination and before a decision is issued, request that the examination provider reschedule the examination before issuing a decision.  However, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.a for cases of repeated failure to report. 
Expressing willingness to report without some reason offered for failing to report to an examination is not the same as good cause.  However, in two situations a claimant expressing a willingness to report for a missed examination is sufficient for another exam to be authorized.
When the claimant expresses willingness to report for a previously missed VA examination after a decision is made – even in the context of an allegation of non-receipt of a scheduling notice or other absence of good cause – that statement is sufficient new and relevant evidence for supplemental claim purposes and an examination is authorized.
38 CFR 3.655(c)(3) provides that in cases of failure to report in connection with examination on continuing entitlement, if notice of willingness to report is received before payment has been discontinued or reduced, action to adjust payment should be deferred and the reexamination must be rescheduled.  However, if there is another failure to report final action to reduce or discontinue payments will be taken. 
Important:  Apply this block in conjunction with all other blocks in this topic. 

2.  Protocol for Scheduling Examinations Using the VHA RSVP Scheduling Program
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on the VHA RSVP program, including 
VHA RSVP scheduling program
VHA RSVP examination cancellations, and
effect of a Veteran’s failure to RSVP.

Change Date

February 27, 2017

IV.i.2.F.2.a.  VHA RSVP Scheduling Program

Based on historical data, when Veterans do not have the opportunity to participate in the scheduling process, they are more likely to fail to report to scheduled examinations.  This results in the non-use of examination appointments that could have been appropriated to other Veterans.
 
Consequently, VHA established an RSVP program to help ensure Veterans attend their scheduled examinations.  Through this program, VHA attempts to reach Veterans by telephone and via mail in order to schedule examinations.
 
Important:  VHA examining facilities are not required to participate in the RSVP scheduling program.

IV.i.2.F.2.b.  VHA RSVP Examination Cancellations

When VHA receives VA Form 21-2507, Request for Physical Examination, from an RO that includes the Veteran’s telephone number and address, they will make several attempts to contact the Veteran and schedule the examination. 
 
If a claimant fails to respond to the attempts to schedule the examination in the RSVP program, VHA will cancel the examination request.  The cancellation notification will reflect that the cancellation was due to the claimant’s failure to respond to the RSVP scheduling process. 
 
The documented information indicating the Veteran failed to RSVP to schedule an examination at a mutually convenient time is considered the same as a failure to report for an examination for the purpose of claims processing.
 
VHA is responsible for ensuring that all procedures and timelines required in the RSVP process were followed.
 
Reference:  For more information on the VHA RSVP scheduling procedure, see the Office of Disability and Medical Assessment Fact Sheet 23-002.

IV.i.2.F.2.c.  Effect of a Veteran’s Failure to RSVP

When VHA provides notification that the Veteran failed to RSVP, the
RO must 
attempt to locate a better or more current address, as discussed in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.c and d, and/or
handle the situation as commensurate with a failure to report for examination, following the procedures outlined in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.a.

M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, Chapter 3, Section A - General Criteria for Sufficiency of Examination Reports
Article ID: 554400000180514
Updated Sep 24, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview 

In This Section

This section contains the topic "Examination Report Requirements."

                              
1.  Examination Report Requirements
                             

Introduction

This topic contains information about reviewing examination reports, including
who must sign examination reports
examiner qualifications and signature requirements
TeleCompensation and Pension (Tele-C&P) and telemental health examinations
review of disability benefits questionnaires (DBQs)
assessing sufficiency of DBQs completed by non-Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) providers
authenticity of DBQs
potential indicators of DBQ inauthenticity
DBQs completed by Veterans who are physicians/health care providers
qualification requirements of examiners – 
psychological examinations
traumatic brain injury (TBI) examinations, and
hearing loss and tinnitus
requirements for 
examination reports, and
acceptable clinical evidence (ACE) examination reports
evaluating disability diagnoses
questions from claimants or their representatives about competency and/or validity of examinations
accepting a fee-based examiner’s report, and
examiner statements that an opinion would be speculative.

Change Date

September 24, 2025

IV.i.3.A.1.a.  Who Must Sign Examination Reports

All examination reports must be signed by the examining health care provider.
  
Notes:  
Examination reports transmitted electronically by either a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) medical center or a contract examination provider must be digitally signed.
Generally, examination reports and the required signatures are documented on disability benefits questionnaires (DBQs) specific to the body system or disability being examined.
Reference:  For more information on DBQs, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.3.

IV.i.3.A.1.b.  Examiner Qualifications and Signature Requirements

VA medical facilities (or the medical examination contractor) are responsible for ensuring that examiners are adequately qualified.
  
Regional office (RO) employees are not expected to routinely scrutinize or question the credentials of clinical personnel to determine the acceptability of their reports, unless there is contradictory evidence of record.  However, DBQs or other examination reports must include a valid signature by the certifying professional.
  
Use the table below to determine what certification elements are required to accept an examination provider’s signature and qualifications.
   
If the DBQ or examination report was prepared by a ...
Then the certification and signature block must contain the following:  ...
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) clinician
signature, and
printed name and credentials (for example, M.D., D.O., F.N.P.).
Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA)-contracted examination provider
signature
credentials, and
area of practice/specialty (for example, cardiology, orthopedics, internal medicine).
non-VA health care provider
signature
printed name and credentials
area of practice/specialty
phone and/or fax number
medical license number, and
National Provider Identifier (NPI) number.
Exceptions:  Inclusion of a(n) 
phone and/or fax number is not required if the
DBQ is otherwise satisfactorily completed, and
provider’s contact information can be verified via internet search, and
NPI number is not required if the DBQ was prepared in support of a foreign claim and/or by an international health care provider.
 
Notes: 
In all cases involving completion of a DBQ or examination report by a non-VA health care provider, the area of practice/specialty of the provider must be identified.  For a DBQ or examination report completed by a VHA or VBA contract examiner, the area of practice/specialty must be evident if a specialist examination is required or requested.
Health care providers participating in the Clinicians in Residence program at ROs must be registered and certified VHA clinicians.
Where the above-outlined signature and certification requirements are not met, follow the procedures discussed in
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.e or f, to return the examination report as insufficient if it was completed by a VHA or VBA contract examiner, or
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.e, to reconcile deficiencies in the DBQ if it was completed by a non-VA health care provider.
References:  For more information on 
who must sign examination reports, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.a
the review of DBQs, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.d
types of examinations that require a specialist, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.1.g, and
insufficient examination reports, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.

IV.i.3.A.1.c.  Tele-C&P and Telemental Health Examination

TeleCompensation and Pension (Tele-C&P) disability evaluations can provide accurate and fully descriptive face-to-face evaluations for VBA rating purposes through use of telehealth video technologies.
 
When an examiner elects to conduct a Tele-C&P (or telemental health) examination utilizing telehealth video technologies in lieu of performing an in-person examination, assess the report for sufficiency under the same standards applicable to in-person examinations.
 
Important:  When reviewing DBQs or medical/examination reports prepared by private, non-VA providers via means of telehealth/telemental health, for the purposes of determining adequacy for rating purposes, exercise prudent judgment by
applying the general assessment principles discussed in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.e, and
considering the
credibility and probative value associated with variables disclosed in the DBQ/report, to include the
clinician’s knowledge of the claimant’s relevant history
length of time the clinician has treated the Veteran, and
extent to which medical records and/or other records were reviewed and considered, and
compatibility of the DBQ/report submitted with the types identified as suitable for performance via telehealth technology in the Office of Disability and Medical Assessment (DMA) Fact Sheet 20-002, Telehealth for Compensation and Pension (C&P) Examinations.

IV.i.3.A.1.d.  Review of DBQs

Review DBQs to ensure
the health care provider meets any specialty requirement for the examination conducted, and
the DBQ is sufficient for rating purposes.
Note:  DBQs completed by a licensed health care provider, to include a nurse practitioner or physician’s assistant, are acceptable for VA examinations.
  
References:  For more information on
DBQs approved for public use, see the Public Disability Benefits Questionnaires page
requirements for examination reports, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.l
examiner qualifications and signature requirements, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.b
use and acceptance of DBQs for VA examinations and opinions, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.3.b ,and
qualification requirements for 
psychological examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.i
traumatic brain injury (TBI) examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.j, and
audiology examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.k.

IV.i.3.A.1.e.  Assessing Sufficiency of DBQs Completed by Non-VA Providers

If the evidentiary record contains a privately completed DBQ, generally, claims processors must
assess the authenticity of the information reported, as described in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.f and g, bearing in mind that it should generally be accepted at face value unless there is reason to doubt or question it
evaluate it under the evidentiary principles discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A, and
determine if a VA examination is still warranted in accordance with
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.d
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.3.b, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.
Use the table below to determine what action must be taken after receiving a DBQ that has been
completed by a private, non-VA provider, and
deemed insufficient for rating purposes for the reasons described in the table.
If the DBQ ...
Then ...
is missing information or contains blank or contradictory values in fields that are relevant to the rating activity
attempt to contact the certifying provider by telephone to resolve insufficiencies, and
document any successful effort at telephone contact on VA Form 27-0820, Report of General Information.
Note:  If the provider cannot be reached by telephone, document any unsuccessful attempt at contact as a permanent note in in the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS), including the
date, time, and purpose of the call, and
provider’s
name, and
telephone number.
Reference:  For more information on requesting clarification from private physicians, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.i.  
was completed by a non-VA provider whose records the Veteran has requested be considered in connection with the claim via submission of
VA Form 21-4142, Authorization to Disclose Information to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and
VA Form 21-4142a, General Release for Medical Provider Information to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 
ensure that all necessary developmental efforts to secure relevant private medical records have been undertaken.
 
Reference:  For more information on requesting evidence from private health care providers, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 3.
requires additional examination components, such as
a review of service treatment records
performance of specific confirmatory or laboratory testing, and/or
rendition of a medical opinion
ask a VA examiner to perform only those missing requirements.
 
Notes:  
No action to develop an insufficient privately completed DBQ need be taken if the facts of the case would not otherwise necessitate providing an examination and/or opinion.
When a privately completed DBQ is deemed insufficient for rating purposes and a VA examination is requested as a result, claims processors must add a permanent VBMS note explaining the reason for finding the privately completed DBQ insufficient.

IV.i.3.A.1.f.  Authenticity of DBQs

In general, as with other items of evidence, DBQs from treatment providers should be taken at face value. 
 
However, all DBQs completed by treatment providers are subject to review to ensure the information provided is seemingly authentic, consistent with the evidentiary record, and free from improper alteration.
 
DBQs released for public use inform the provider that
the patient is applying for VA benefits and VA will consider the information provided in processing the claim
the physician’s signature constitutes a certification that the information provided on the form is accurate, complete, and current, and
VA may request medical information, including additional examinations, if necessary to complete VA’s review of a claimant’s application.
Where a review of the DBQ raises questions of authenticity or improper alteration, determine whether additional development is necessary.  This may include
validation of results by the treatment provider
obtaining medical records, and/or
a VA examination. 
Informal contact with the Office of Inspector General or a fraud referral may also be appropriate, particularly if the record shows any of the potential indicators of inauthenticity described in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.g.
  
Important:
Claims processors may not dismiss a privately completed DBQ without a justifiable and documented reason. 
If a claims processor determines that a privately completed DBQ is potentially inauthentic and a VA examination is needed, then the claims processor must add a permanent VBMS note stating PDBQ followed by the reason the DBQ appears inauthentic. 
Example:  PDBQ – Provider contact information unverifiable.
References:  For more information on
when development to obtain additional evidence may be needed, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.B.1.a
taking evidence at face value, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A
handling fraudulent cases, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 3.A
potential indicators of DBQ inauthenticity, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.g, and
adding a permanent VBMS note, see 
M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.c, and
the VBMS Core User Guide.

IV.i.3.A.1.g.  Potential Indicators of DBQ Inauthenticity

While privately completed DBQs should generally be accepted at face value, as discussed in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.e and f, there may be factors that warrant closer scrutiny to assess the authenticity of the information provided. 
 
Indicators of potential inauthenticity include, but are not limited to, the following:
The non-VA provider identified on the DBQ
has contact information that is unverifiable or contains discrepancies, or
is located an unreasonable distance (generally, more than 100 miles) from the Veteran’s place of residence, yet the provider reported
regularly seeing the Veteran as a patient, and/or
that the examination was completed in person.
The privately completed DBQ contains
information that conflicts with the overall evidentiary record, particularly concerning details that impact the outcome of the claim, or
signs of improper alteration (for example, inconsistent appearance of text and formatting, such as the examiner certification and signature section being visually different than other sections of the DBQ).
VA determines the privately completed DBQ is insufficient for rating purposes and orders an examination, but the Veteran refuses to report for the examination. 
Important: 
The presence of one or more of these potential indicators of inauthenticity does not automatically mean that a privately completed DBQ is inauthentic or fraudulent.  However, the presence of one or more of these indicators may call into question the authenticity of the information provided and may warrant additional development, as discussed in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.f, and/or referral for possible fraud review.  This is necessarily a case-by-case determination.
The distance between the non-VA provider’s location and the Veteran’s place of residence should not be considered an indicator of potential inauthenticity, as described above, if the Veteran
lives in a remote area, such that driving more than 100 miles to see a health care provider would not be considered unreasonable, or
regularly or periodically travels more than 100 miles to see the particular health care provider for a specific reason (for example, to receive specialized treatment at a cancer center or research hospital).
A privately completed DBQ should not be routinely rejected or automatically deemed potentially inauthentic or fraudulent solely because it supports entitlement to a maximum schedular (or other increased) evaluation for the condition, unless such a disability picture is clearly inconsistent with the overall evidentiary record.  
Notes:  
Claims processors have a duty to evaluate and weigh all evidence of record, including privately completed DBQs.  If it is determined that a privately completed DBQ contains indicator(s) of inauthenticity that are substantive enough to deem it potentially inauthentic or fraudulent, claims processors have the authority to assign low or no probative value to the privately completed DBQ. 
If a privately completed DBQ is erroneously deemed insufficient and the Veteran fails to report for an examination that was requested on the basis of the DBQ being inadequate for rating purposes, then the privately completed DBQ should not be assigned lower probative value.  
 
References:  For more information on
reviewing DBQs prepared by private, non-VA providers via telehealth technology, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.c
a Veteran’s submission of evidence and refusal to attend a VA examination, see Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet.App. 171 (2005)
the definition of fraud, see
38 CFR 3.901(a), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 3.A.1.a
handling cases of fraud, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 3.A.2, and
evaluating evidence and determining probative value, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.  

IV.i.3.A.1.h. DBQs Completed by Veterans Who Are Physicians/Health Care Providers

VA cannot summarily discount otherwise competent medical evidence from a Veteran who is a physician or health care provider.  DBQ reports completed by these individuals will be reviewed under the same criteria for reviewing DBQs submitted by a third-party health care provider.
  
In effect, VA claims adjudicators must subject the evidence of record to some degree of scrutiny to determine its probative worth.  It is improper in VA practice to “exclude” evidence.  Decision makers must weigh the probative value of the evidence and discuss its probative value in the decision narrative.
  
Note:  Exercise the same weighing of probative value for internal-use DBQs that are completed by an external non-VA provider.
  
Important:  Ensure the Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) – Veteran Provided DOCUMENT TYPE under the VBMS UNSOLICITED EVIDENCE tab has been updated for DBQs submitted from non-VA providers.
  
References:  For more information on
reviewing DBQs, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.d
evidentiary concepts, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.2
written testimony submitted by the claimant, see 38 CFR 3.200(b), and
case law supporting adequacy of examination completed by a Veteran-health care provider, see Pond v. West, 12 Vet.App. 341 (1999).

IV.i.3.A.1.i.  Qualification Requirements of Examiners –  Psychological Examinations

The following credentialed mental health professionals are qualified to perform C&P psychological examinations:
board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrists
licensed doctorate-level psychologists, or
the following other mental health professionals, under the close supervision of a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist or licensed doctorate-level psychologist:
non-licensed doctorate-level psychologists working toward licensure
psychiatry residents, and
clinical or counseling psychologists completing a one-year internship or residency.
Note:  “Close supervision” means that the supervising psychiatrist or psychologist met with the Veteran and conferred with the examining mental health professional in providing the diagnosis and the final assessment.  The supervising psychiatrist or psychologist must co-sign the examination report. 
  
Important:  For a claim for service connection (SC) for posttraumatic stress disorder based upon a stressor related to the Veteran’s fear of hostile military or terrorist activity, 38 CFR 3.304(f)(3) directs that the examination must be conducted by a VA psychiatrist or psychologist, or a psychiatrist or psychologist with whom VA has contracted.
  
Reference:  For more information on qualifications of examiners for psychological examinations, see the DBQ Switchboard.

IV.i.3.A.1.j.Qualification Requirements of Examiners – TBI Examinations

The initial diagnosis of TBI must be made by one of the following specialists:
physiatrists
psychiatrists
neurosurgeons, or
neurologists. 
Note:  A generalist clinician who has successfully completed the Disability Examination Management Office TBI training module may conduct a TBI examination, if a TBI diagnosis is of record and was established by one of the aforementioned specialty providers.
   
Reference:  For more information on qualifications of examiners for TBI examinations, see the Initial Evaluation of Residuals of Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Disability Benefits Questionnaire in the DBQ Switchboard.

IV.i.3.A.1.k.Qualification Requirements of Examiners –Hearing Loss and Tinnitus

Hearing loss examinations must be completed by a state-licensed audiologist.  
  
If only a tinnitus examination is being requested, the examination may be conducted by either an audiologist or non-audiologist clinician, if a hearing loss examination is of record.
Notes: 
It is appropriate to request an examination for tinnitus alone when
a Veteran claims SC for tinnitus on the basis that it is due to a disability other than hearing loss, and/or
tinnitus was treated during military service.
For other situations – particularly those in which the etiology of tinnitus is unclear or unspecified – it is necessary to request both hearing loss and tinnitus examinations.
Audiology licensing requirements and credentials in a foreign country may not be the same as in the U.S., and audiologists are not available in all countries.
For audiology examinations conducted in foreign countries, the examiner must be licensed to provide diagnostic audiology services according to the licensing standards in the country or territory where the examiner is providing services.  This also includes medical examiners credentialed in specialties related to otolaryngology.
For contract examinations, the VBA contract examination vendor verifies that the provider meets applicable foreign licensing requirements.  Therefore, no additional verification is needed and claims processors should presume the selected examiner meets the qualification requirements for an audiology examination.
References:  For more information on
qualifications of examiners for hearing loss and tinnitus examinations, see the Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire in the DBQ Switchboard, and
evaluating hearing loss and tinnitus, see
38 CFR 4.85
38 CFR 4.87, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.

IV.i.3.A.1.l.  Requirements for Examination Reports

VA examinations are to be conducted using DBQs which are disease- and condition-specific, organized as a documentation tool to provide the precise medical evidence needed to rate specific disabilities.  The examiner is asked to
complete the form step by step
answer the questions posed, and
provide additional information as required by examination findings.
Note:  The report must have a definite and unambiguous description of the disability for each complaint or claimed condition.
  
Common features of DBQs include
a diagnosis section
medical history 
objective findings
results of diagnostic testing performed, and
a remarks section for any necessary explanation.
Additional sections may be found on some DBQs, depending on the specialty involved.
  
Reference:  For more information on DBQs, see the DBQ Switchboard.

IV.i.3.A.1.m.Requirements for ACE Examination Reports

When an examination provider uses acceptable clinical evidence (ACE) in lieu of conducting an in-person examination, review the report for sufficiency.  The report must
note use of the ACE Process, and
indicate that the claims folder was reviewed.
Reference:  For more information on ACE examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.4.

IV.i.3.A.1.n.  Evaluating Disability Diagnoses

The precise cause of a disability is often difficult to determine.  It is important that
the same disability is not covered by more than one diagnosis, and
a definite and unambiguous diagnosis is made for each complaint or symptom having a medical cause.
The table below describes various examination scenarios and what is required for a sufficient diagnosis.
  
If ...
Then ...
there are no findings on examination
a diagnosis of a disability should not be rendered by the examiner.
  
Example:  Examiner states “normal left knee” and examination shows normal range of motion (ROM), normal stability, and no complaints of pain or other symptoms.
there are findings on examination
a definitive diagnosis of a disability should be rendered by the examiner.
  
Example:  Examiner diagnoses “left knee patellofemoral syndrome” and examination shows limited ROM with pain.
  
Important:
Non-committal diagnoses, such as those including the terms “rule-out” and/or “differential,” are not sufficient for rating purposes.
As discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.2, symptoms, even in the absence of a specific diagnosis, may constitute a disability sufficient for rating purposes if they produce functional impairment of earning capacity.
a disability exists but a definite name cannot be given
the examiner should describe the disability and indicate that it is of unknown etiology.
  
Example:  “Respiratory insufficiency of unknown etiology.”
the examiner states further studies, evaluations, or laboratory tests are needed
the additional studies, evaluations, or testing must be performed before the diagnosis on examination can be considered final.
a previously established diagnosis is changed by the examiner
the examiner must state whether the current diagnosis represents
a new disability, or
a progression of the former disability.
 
Reference:  For more information on handling examinations insufficient for rating purposes, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.

IV.i.3.A.1.o.  Questions From Claimants or Their Representatives About Competency and/or Validity of Examinations

Duly consider concerns raised by the claimant or recognized representative about a completed examination or opinion.  Communications raising concerns may take the form of (but are not necessarily limited to)
complaints about the examiner
requests for information about the examiner’s qualifications
assertions that records or other relevant information or evidence was not considered, and/or
requests for another examination or opinion.
Important:  The mere fact that such a communication is received does not mean that the examination is insufficient or in need of clarification, or that there is a further duty to assist to obtain records or another examination.  However, consideration must be given to whether one or more of those remedies is appropriate.  Do not request a new examination or return an examination as insufficient solely on the basis of a complaint from the claimant or representative.  The substance of the communication must be analyzed as discussed below.  
  
The table below provides guidance on interpreting communications from claimants or a representative raising concerns about examinations and what action to take, as applicable.
  
If the substance of the communication is ...
Then ...
that the examiner was not qualified to perform the examination or issue the opinion
review M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.band additional blocks in this topic on qualifications for specific types of examinations, and
consider the guidance on competency of medical evidence in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.
When that review leads to a conclusion that the examiner did not have the appropriate qualifications, or that the conclusions of the examination or opinion were otherwise not competent, use the table below to determine the appropriate action. 
If ...
Then ...
the examination in question was completed by a VHA facility, and
a decision has not been made on the associated claim
follow the guidance in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.e for returning an insufficient VHA examination.
the examination in question was completed by a contract vendor, and
a decision has not been made on the associated claim
follow the guidance in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.f for returning an insufficient contract examination.
a decision has been made on the associated claim, or
the time period for returning a VHA examination as insufficient has already passed
request a new examination for only those contentions where the prior examination was found to be insufficient.
  
Notes:
Where an examiner is basically competent, matters like specialty, board certification, experience, and other related factors will merely be considerations in determining probative value of the examination report or opinion.
VHA facilities and contract examination vendors are responsible for selecting examiners and ensuring they are adequately qualified.  Accordingly, there is a presumption that a selected medical examiner is qualified and competent.  
that the examination was not sufficient or requires clarification
review M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B and C, and take any action required by those sections.
that additional material evidence must be obtained to substantiate the claim
review procedures on the duty to assist, as discussed in 
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A and B.
 
Notes:  
VA’s C&P claim adjudication system does not have a procedure for completion of interrogatories by VA personnel.  Interrogatories are written questions that, in some court proceedings, must be answered under oath. If the claimant or representative submits a communication characterized as an interrogatory
do not 
complete and return the document, or
refer it to the examiner, but 
do 
look at the substance of the communication as indicated above in this block, and
determine if it is raising questions about examiner competency, adequacy of the examination, or satisfaction of the duty to assist. 
When needed to fulfill a claimant’s request or a requirement of the Board of Veterans' Appeals, the curriculum vitae (CV) of a VHA or VBA contract examiner must be requested via e-mail to VAVBAWAS/CO/Contract Examination Inquiries.  
Each request should contain as much detail as possible, to include
the name of the examiner
the examiner’s title, credentials, and/or area of practice/specialty (such as M.D., Ph.D., psychology, or dentistry)
the geographic location in which the examination in question took place (with attention to such information as the Veterans Integrated Services Network (VISN) of jurisdiction (if known), State, and facility name)
the year in which the examination in question took place
indication as to whether the request pertains to a VHA or VBA contract examiner, and
for VBA contract examiners, the individual contract vendor.
Enter a permanent note in VBMS to document when a CV is requested or received.
Upload the CV to the electronic claims folder upon receipt, as applicable.
Exception:  If a request is received directly from a private attorney for the CV of a VHA or VBA contract examiner, send the CV request to the VBA Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Office at VAVBAWAS/CO/FOIA.
References:  For more information on a claimant’s
request for information, or complaints, about a VA examination or opinion, see Nohr v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 124 (2014), and 
rights to access an examiner’s CV, see Francway v. Wilkie, 930 F.3d 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2019).

IV.i.3.A.1.p.  Accepting a Fee-Based Examiner’s Report

There is no prohibition against acceptance of a VA examination report for rating purposes from a fee-based medical examiner who has previously submitted a statement on the claimant’s behalf.

IV.i.3.A.1.q.  Examiner Statements That an Opinion Would Be Speculative

Pay careful attention to any conclusion by the examiner that an opinion could not be provided without resorting to mere speculation (or any similar language to that effect).
 
VA may only accept a medical examiner’s conclusion that an opinion would be speculative if
the examiner has 
explained the basis for such an opinion, identifying what facts cannot be determined, and
demonstrated consideration of all procurable and relevant information (to include medical treatment records and/or lay testimony), or
the basis for the opinion is otherwise apparent in VA’s review of the evidence.
The medical opinion may be insufficient for rating purposes if an examiner’s conclusion 
is not adequately justified, or
implies a general lack of knowledge or an aversion to opining on matters beyond direct observation. 
In such instances, seek clarification of the conclusion.
  
Note:  If the examiner specifically states that a medical opinion cannot be provided unless specific evidence is made available, VA’s duty to assist requires that VA determine whether that evidence may be reasonably obtained.  If so, VA is to make efforts to obtain it and then seek an additional medical opinion which considers the relevant information.
  
Reference:  For more information on speculative opinions, see 
Daves v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 46 (2007)
Jones (Michael H.) v. Shinseki, 23 Vet.App. 382 (2010), and
Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet.App. 26 (2017).
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, Chapter 3, Section B - Examination Sufficiency for Specific Disabilities
Article ID: 554400000180516
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview 

In This Section

This section contains the topic “Reviewing Examination Reports for Rating Criteria.”

                                    
1.  Reviewing Examination Reports for Rating Criteria
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about examination considerations specific to certain disabilities and body systems, including
eye examination report review
headache examination report review
hearing loss and tinnitus examination report review
mental health examination report review
heart conditions examination report review for metabolic equivalents (METs)
musculoskeletal examination report review for 
range of motion (ROM), 
functional loss, and 
X-rays
nerves examination report review
respiratory examination report review for pulmonary function tests (PFTs)
skin and scars examination report review
sleep disorders examination report review
temporomandibular disorder (TMD) examination report review, and
traumatic brain injury (TBI) examination report review.

Change Date

April 28, 2025

IV.i.3.B.1.a.   Eye Examination Report Review

When a visual field defect is perceived, examiners must perform any necessary visual field testing using either
Goldmann kinetic perimetry, or
automated perimetry using Humphrey Model 750, Octopus Model 101, or later versions of these perimetric devices with simulated kinetic Goldmann testing capability.
If the examination was not performed using the proper testing method, then the examination report should be returned as insufficient.  An examination sufficient for rating purposes must include, at minimum,
documentation of numerical values for all required fields as measured by a perimetric device, or
results documented on a Goldmann chart.
Important:  Irrespective of the eye condition being examined, no visual field testing is required if the examiner indicates that the Veteran does not suffer a visual field defect.  The absence of visual field testing results does not, in these instances, render an examination report insufficient for rating purposes.
   
Reference:  For more information on eye conditions, see
38 CFR 4.75
38 CFR 4.76(b)(3)
38 CFR 4.77
38 CFR 4.79, and 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.A.

IV.i.3.B.1.b.  Headache Examination Report Review

A neurological headache examination report will be considered insufficient if it does not indicate the frequency of prostrating headaches and whether the headaches are migraine-type or non-migraine type.
  
Reference:  For more information on rating migraines, see 
38 CFR 4.124a, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.3.

IV.i.3.B.1.c.  Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Examination Report Review

A hearing loss and tinnitus examination report may be considered insufficient if an opinion was requested but is not provided in the report.
  
Unusual circumstances may arise during the examination, requiring the examiner to
identify any audiometric frequencies that could not be tested (CNT) and explain why testing could not be done
provide an explanation of why speech discrimination testing was not performed on the Veteran, or why a speech discrimination score is not appropriate in the Veteran's case, and/or
state the functional impact of tinnitus.
Note:  In a case involving service connection (SC) for hearing loss where an etiology opinion is required, the examiner’s rationale should not solely discuss that hearing was normal at the times of the Veteran’s enlistment and separation. 
When there is a current diagnosis of hearing loss, the examiner should provide an explanation as to how the provided opinion was reached.  This includes discussing pertinent objective evidence, lay testimony from the Veteran, and scientific literature that either refutes or supports a relationship between the current hearing loss and an event, injury, or disease during military service. 
Decision makers should not deny SC for hearing loss based on an examiner’s medical opinion rationale which solely discusses that hearing was normal during service to support a conclusion that the current hearing loss is not related to service.  The examination report should be returned due to an insufficient medical opinion rationale.
References:  For more information on 
requesting audiometric examinations and medical opinions, see  M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.d, and
the requirement for a supporting rationale for medical opinions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.3.g.

IV.i.3.B.1.d.  Mental Health Examination Report Review

Mental health examinations can be complex when there are psychological symptoms existing simultaneously with and usually independently of another medical condition, such as posttraumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury (TBI) symptoms of memory loss.
  
An examination report may be insufficient if
there is more than one mental disorder diagnosed, and the examiner does not address the criteria for all the diagnoses
there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder and TBI, and the examiner does not 
differentiate and list which symptom(s) is/are attributable to each diagnosis, or
provide a reason that it is not possible to differentiate what portion of each symptom is attributable to each diagnosis
the Occupational and Social Impairment section of the report is not completed, or
the examiner fails to address the question of the claimant’s competency.
Reference:  For more information on considering a change in the diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 13.

IV.i.3.B.1.e.  Heart Conditions Examination Report Review for METs

The metabolic equivalents (METs) score for heart conditions can be provided as an estimate, as indicated on the disability benefits questionnaires (DBQs).  If the Veteran has comorbid conditions that prevent the examiner from performing METs testing or providing an interview-based METs estimate, then the
examiner must indicate why 
METs testing could not be performed, or
a METs estimate could not be provided, and
rating activity will evaluate the condition based on the remaining examination results and evidence of record.
Reference:  For more information on rating heart conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.

IV.i.3.B.1.f.  Musculoskeletal Examination Report Review for ROM
 

In order to address the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) interpretation of Department of Veterans Affairs regulations in DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995), and Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32 (2011), musculoskeletal joint examination reports must address range of motion (ROM) criteria for repetitive motion and flare-ups.
  
Following the initial assessment of ROM, the examiner must perform repetitive-use testing to the extent permitted by the disability under evaluation.  After the initial measurement, the examiner must reassess ROM after three repetitions and report the post-test measurements.  
 
The examination report is insufficient if the examiner does not
repeat ROM testing during the examination and report any additional functional loss, or
provide a rational explanation for why repetitive-use testing could not be accomplished, if applicable.
In order to address CAVC’s holding in Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 158 (2016), and ensure adequacy for rating purposes, musculoskeletal examination reports must also reflect testing of
involved joints for pain
on both active and passive motion, and
in states of weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing, and
ROM of the opposite, undamaged joint, if applicable and medically feasible.
Musculoskeletal examination reports containing self-evident contradictory findings, conclusions, and/or terminology will also be rendered insufficient or require additional clarification.  Examples of such contradictory examination features include, but are not limited to, the following:
annotations of “unaffected gait” and “walks with a cane” in the same report
indication that a joint has required surgery, accompanied by the annotation “scar not addressed,” and
conclusion that a joint warrants no clinical diagnosis, accompanied by coexisting objective findings of unqualified
irregular limitation of motion (LOM)
pain on ROM testing, and/or
degenerative changes or arthritis.
References:  For more information on
rating musculoskeletal conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A-F
musculoskeletal examination report review for
functional loss, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.g, and
x-rays, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.h
additional functional impairment during flare-ups or with repeated use over time, see
DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995), and
Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32 (2011), and
required ROM testing, see Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 158 (2016).

IV.i.3.B.1.g.  Musculoskeletal Examination Report Review for Functional Loss

The clinician conducting a musculoskeletal examination must address additional functional limitation or LOM during flare-ups or following repeated use over time, based on the Veteran’s history and the examiner’s clinical judgment.
  
The examination report must address whether the functional ability of a joint is significantly limited during flare-ups or when the joint is used repeatedly over a period of time due to
pain
weakness
fatigability, and/or
incoordination.
If such opinion is not feasible, then the examiner must state so and provide an explanation as to why the opinion cannot be rendered.
  
Example:  John Smith reports severe knee pain with repeated use over time when walking back and forth to the store several times a day.  During those flare-ups, the capacity for knee flexion is demonstrated/reported to be 0-110 degrees.
Important:  The examiner conducting an initial or review musculoskeletal examination must consider all the evidence of record when estimating functional loss due to flare-ups.  The examiner must review the claims folder in order to adequately meet this requirement.  
References:  For more information on 
requirement for claims folder review in a musculoskeletal examination, see
Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet.App. 26 (2017), and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.8.b, and
musculoskeletal examination report review for
ROM, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.f, and
x-rays, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.h.

IV.i.3.B.1.h.  Musculoskeletal Examination Report Review for X-Rays

During review of musculoskeletal examination reports, check to ensure that x-rays were obtained when necessary. 
  
A diagnosis of arthritis (other than multi-joint) must be confirmed by x-ray or other radiographic testing before SC may be established. 
  
Where there is a claim of non-specific joint pain in a joint or multiple joints, x-rays will not be provided prior to the Veteran being seen by the examiner.  
The examiner will determine if x-rays are needed in order to provide a diagnosis consistent with the history and symptomatology.  
If there is a diagnosis other than degenerative or post-traumatic arthritis, or a determination that no diagnosable disability exists, do not return the examination as insufficient merely because x-rays were not provided.  
However, when arthritis (other than multi-joint) is claimed or diagnosed, the examination and/or medical evidence of record must include x-rays of the joint at issue.  If the examination does not include x-rays, and none are otherwise available for consideration, then return the examination report as insufficient.
  
Note:  Once arthritic changes are shown in a joint, no further x-rays will ever be required for that joint to support a diagnosis of arthritis.
  
References:  For more information on 
musculoskeletal examination report review for
ROM, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.f, and
functional loss, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.g, and
multi-joint arthritis and arthritis other than multi-joint, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.

IV.i.3.B.1.i.  Nerves Examination Report Review

Examiners must, to the extent possible, identify the nerve that best correlates to the area affected even if the condition is a spinal cord nerve condition.
  
This information will allow the rating decision to address the functional impairment of the area affected.
  
Reference:  For more information on diseases of the peripheral nerves, see 
38 CFR 4.120, and 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2.

IV.i.3.B.1.j.  Respiratory Examination Report Review for PFTs

Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are required for most respiratory conditions unless
there is a recent study in the Veteran’s records that accurately reflects the Veteran’s current condition, or
the examiner provides an explanation on the special exceptions listed in 38 CFR 4.96(d)(1)(i) through (iv). 
Obtaining and reporting the PFT is only half of the requirement.  The other half of the requirement is for the examiner to interpret the PFT in relation to the claimed condition. 
  
References:  For more information on
when PFTs are required, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 4.A.1.e, and
assigning disability evaluations based on the results of PFTs, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 4.A.1.f.

IV.i.3.B.1.k.  Skin and Scars Examination Report Review

Use the table below to ensure a skin or scar examination report is not considered insufficient for rating purposes.
 
If the disability being assessed is a ...
Then the ...
skin condition (dermatitis, eczema, etc.) whose evaluation criteria involve consideration of its effects on bodily areas
Skin Diseases Disability Benefits Questionnaire must identify the total body surface area and exposed body surface area (both expressed as percentages) affected.
scar
Scars/Disfigurement Disability Benefits Questionnaire must identify the scar’s 
location (left lower extremity, right upper extremity, etc.)
type (linear, superficial non-linear, painful, etc.), and
dimensions of measurement (length and width).
Note:  Non-scar DBQs identifying residual scars that are not painful/unstable or greater than 39 square centimeters in area are also sufficient for rating purposes.
 
Notes: 
If color photographs are not included with a skin or scar examination report, do not return the examination report as insufficient to request photographs unless the report clearly indicates that photographs werecaptured at the time of examination but fails to provide them.  In this instance, the photographs must be obtained for rating consideration.  
If photographs are included, then consider the evidence when evaluating the condition(s) at issue.
Reference:  For more information on rating skin conditions and scars, see 
38 CFR 4.118, and 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 10.

IV.i.3.B.1.l.  Sleep Disorders Examination Review

Sleep apnea must be diagnosed with a sleep study.  Review the sleep study to ensure the condition is interpreted in relationship to the claimed condition.
 
If there is a service-connected (SC) condition that is comorbid to the sleep apnea that requires a PFT, like asthma, ensure that such testing was completed.
 
Sleep disturbances, such as insomnia, may be claimed as secondary manifestations of other primary conditions, including, but not limited to,
mental health disorders
pain experienced from an SC disability, and/or
signs or symptoms of undiagnosed illness and medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses.
Notes:  
When the Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire is negative for a diagnosis of sleep apnea but the examiner provides information about sleep disturbances, such as insomnia, review the report in accordance with M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 13.1.l to determine if any additional medical opinion is required.
As expressed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 4.A.2.f, upper airway resistance syndrome is neither synonymous with sleep apnea nor considered a ratable disability for compensation purposes.  As such, its diagnosis does not warrant requesting any examination, medical opinion, or clarification of existing examination results.
References:  For more information on
determining when an examination or medical opinion is necessary, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A
subthreshold diagnoses, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.1.b
sleep apnea and sleep studies, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 4.A.2.a
sleep apnea schedule of ratings, see 38 CFR 4.97, diagnostic code (DC) 6847, and
the Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire, see the DBQ Switchboard.

IV.i.3.B.1.m.  TMD Examination Report Review

There is no need to return a temporomandibular disorder (TMD) examination report simply because a dentist did not perform the examination.  TMD is musculoskeletal in nature.
   
Important:  As part of the musculoskeletal requirements, the Temporomandibular Disorders (TMDs) Disability Benefits Questionnaire requires the examiner to address
flare-ups that impact the function of the temporomandibular joint
initial ROM measurements
ROM measurement after repetitive-use testing
functional loss and additional limitation in ROM, and
pain (pain on palpation) and crepitus.
References:  For more information on
rating TMD, see 
38 CFR 4.150, DC 9905, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 14.2.b, and
the Temporomandibular Disorders (TMDs) Disability Benefits Questionnaire, see the DBQ Switchboard.

IV.i.3.B.1.n.  TBI Examination Report Review

Ensure the initial TBI diagnosis is provided by a qualified examiner.
  
The examiner must address
all the facets of the TBI diagnosis, and if any facets are left blank, it must be indicated in the Remarks section of the DBQ that the symptoms are related to a non-TBI condition, with an explanation provided
any additional residuals, other findings, diagnostic testing, functional impact of the diagnosis, and an explanation regarding conflicting diagnoses from medical versus mental health clinicians, if applicable 
other pertinent physical findings, scars, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms, such as mental, physical, or neurological conditions or residuals attributable to a TBI (such as migraine headaches or Meniere’s disease), and
the functional impact on the Veteran’s ability to work.
A mental health evaluation alone is not sufficient in addressing TBI.  A TBI examination completed by a medical clinician, with input from a mental health examiner, needs to be completed when attributable signs and symptoms co-exist.
  
Objective evidence and neuropsychiatric testing may be required when cognitive impairment symptoms are identified.  Some examples of cognitive impairment symptomology include
memory loss, and
reduced attention, concentration, and executive functioning.
References:  For more information on
TBI examiner qualifications, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.j, and
evaluating TBI, see
38 CFR 4.124a, and 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, Chapter 3, Section C - Insufficient Examinations
Article ID: 554400000180517
Updated Jul 23, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview 

In This Section

This section contains the topic, “Handling Examination and Other Medical Reports That Are Insufficient for Rating Purposes.”

                                    
1.  Handling Examination and Other Medical Reports That Are Insufficient for Rating Purposes
                             

Introduction

This topic contains information about handling insufficient examination reports, including
insufficient examination reports
handling insufficient examination reports that were erroneously requested
clarification of examination reports
resolving inconsistencies
returning examination reports requested through the
Compensation and Pension Record Interchange (CAPRI), and
Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS)
determining whether a rework request or new examination scheduling request (ESR) in VBMS is required
handling non-Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) hospital reports that are insufficient for rating purposes, and
requesting clarification from private physicians.

Change Date

July 23, 2025

IV.i.3.C.1.a.Insufficient Examination Reports

A Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) examination report submitted to the rating activity must be as complete as possible.
 
Any missing required information on the report makes the examination report insufficient for rating purposes.  The following are examples of deficiencies that would render an examination report insufficient:
The examination report is unsigned.
The examination report does not address all disabilities for which an examination was requested.
The required question(s) on the disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) is/are unanswered.
The required review of the claims folder was not accomplished, when applicable.
The report is missing information pertinent to the specific disability under review, such as the impact of musculoskeletal pain on the functional loss of an affected joint.
A medical opinion is not properly supported by a valid rationale and/or by the evidence of record.
A requested medical opinion was not furnished.
Notes:  
If an examination report indicates there is no diagnosis for a claimed condition, then the examination report is not automatically insufficient if the examiner fails to furnish a requested medical opinion for that claimed condition. 
In general, if there is no diagnosis, then the request for a medical opinion is rendered moot. 
However, there are certain claim types or disability pictures for which a medical opinion may still be required, even in the absence of a clinical diagnosis.  These circumstances include
when joint pain or other subjective symptoms without a specific diagnosis may warrant service connection (SC) based on functional impairment of earning capacity, as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.2, but the claim being reviewed cannot be decided without a medical opinion
when an examiner’s determination of disability pattern is required to decide a claim for SC of an undiagnosed illness from a Persian Gulf Veteran, as discussed in M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart ii, 1.B.2.p, or
any other scenario where a decision cannot be made without a medical opinion, based on guidance specific to the issue at hand and/or a question or conflict raised by the evidence.  
If the rating activity determines that a necessary examination was canceled without a valid reason, it must submit a new examination request to the examining facility and specify why the previous cancellation was inappropriate.
Example:  An examination requested in connection with a claim for a knee condition was not completed because “the claimed condition was not documented and diagnosed in the service treatment records on examiner review.”  If the rating activity determines that such examination is needed, the existing report or cancellation notice should be returned to the examining facility as insufficient for rating purposes.
  
Important:  There are instances where missing information in an examination report does not make the examination itself insufficient.  However, claims processors must seek and obtain the missing information via communication with and clarification by the examiner, as discussed in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.c, before issuing a final decision on the underlying claim.
  
References:  For more information on
inadequate examinations, see 
38 CFR 4.2, and
38 CFR 4.70
circumstances under which further development may be needed, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.B.1.a
resolving inconsistencies, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.d
descriptions of pain affecting functional loss, see Floyd v. Brown, 9 Vet.App. 88 (1996), and
the requirement for a supporting rationale for medical opinions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.3.g.

IV.i.3.C.1.b.Handling Insufficient Examination Reports That Were Erroneously Requested

In Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 303 (2007), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that if VA provides an examination when developing a claim for SC, even if not statutorily obligated to do so,
the examination must be adequate, or
the Veteran must be notified as to why one will not or cannot be provided.
Exception:  The above requirement for adequacy does not apply to examination reports initiated by the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) that do not
relate to the contentions under consideration in the pending claim, or
potentially impact existing benefit entitlement.

IV.i.3.C.1.c.   Clarification of Examination Reports

An examination report that needs clarification must be discussed with or returned to the examiner.  Such instances include, but are not limited to, the following:
The same disability is diagnosed differently by different examiners.
Conclusions or findings have been expressed in ambiguous or equivocal terms.
An examination report shows a change in the diagnosis or etiology for a disability previously recognized as service-connected.
An examination was conducted prior to the issuance of an amendment to the rating schedule, and additional information is needed to fully consider and properly evaluate the disability at issue in light of newly implemented criteria.
An examination report provides information that
contradicts or conflicts with other information within the same DBQ, or
requires additional context for rating purposes. 
Note:  It is not uncommon for VA to receive evidence both in favor of and against a claim.  The mere presence of both positive and negative evidence does not necessarily require clarification or reconciliation by an examiner.  It is the responsibility of the rating activity to review and weigh all relevant evidence and to make determinations as to the probative value and persuasiveness of the evidence.  Clarification or reconciliation by an examiner is only necessary if the medical evidence of record is insufficient to support a conclusion. 
Reference:  For more information on reviewing and weighing evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.  

IV.i.3.C.1.d.  Resolving Inconsistencies

If any inconsistency or conflicting findings of various medical examiners renders the evidence of record insufficient for rating purposes, resolve the inconsistency or conflict by requesting a medical opinion from a different examiner.
  
References:  For more information on requesting
independent medical opinions, see 
38 CFR 3.328, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.E.5, and
medical opinions, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.7.

IV.i.3.C.1.e.  Returning Examination Reports Requested Through CAPRI

Refer to the table below to determine how to return an insufficient or inadequate examination report to the appropriate provider when the examination was originally requested through the Compensation and Pension Record Interchange (CAPRI).
 
If the examination report ...
Then ...
is deemed insufficient within 45 days of its receipt
return the examination as insufficient through CAPRI.
is deemed insufficient more than 45 days following its receipt
prepare and submit a new examination request using CAPRI.
requires additional clarification
call or e-mail the examiner or point of contact at the examination facility to try to resolve the issue(s), or
input a medical opinion DBQ request for the necessary supplemental information in CAPRI if the issue(s) is/are complex or cannot be resolved by telephone or e-mail.
presents an opinion or diagnosis that conflicts with other evidence of record andthe conflict cannot be resolved via review of the evidentiary record
input a new medical opinion DBQ request in CAPRI.
 
Important: 
Avoid using language that can be construed as adversarial when returning reports for clarification.  Use the term insufficient for rating purposesrather than inadequate examination.
Clearly describe the issue(s) needing clarification or resolution. 
Notes:
For VHA examinations, try to resolve any questions or need for clarification with regional office resident clinicians as often as possible in order to promote timely claims processing and efficient customer service.
When the best interest of the Veteran will be advanced by a personal conference or e-mail with the examiner, such measures should always be considered.  
References:  For more information on 
navigation of and data entry in CAPRI, see the CAPRI User Manual
deficiencies that would render an examination report insufficient, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.a, and
when an examination report would need clarification, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.c.

IV.i.3.C.1.f.  Returning Examination Reports Requested Through VBMS

Refer to the table below to determine how to return an insufficient or inadequate examination report to the appropriate provider when the examination was originally requested through the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS). 
 
If the examination report ...
Then ...
is deemed insufficient
return the examination report by 
accessing the EXAMS chevron in VBMS
selecting
Rework from the ACTIONS menu
each contention requiring additional attention
Insufficiency as the rework type, and
one or more bases for the report’s return from the AVAILABLE REWORK REASONS drop-down menu, and
entering a clear description of the issue(s) needing clarification or resolution in the DETAILED RATIONALE FOR REWORK field.
Important:  
When a contract examination report is found to be insufficient, it should not be resolved by VHA examiners.
A rework request must be routed to the vendor that produced the insufficient examination report.  Rework requests must not be routed to a new vendor.
Note:  Insufficient examination reports include those which are missing
information on the requested DBQ that is needed for rating purposes, or
an entire requested DBQ.
Reference:  For more information on deficiencies that would render an examination report insufficient, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.a.
requires clarification
return the examination report by 
accessing the EXAMS chevron in VBMS
selecting
Rework from the ACTIONS menu
each contention requiring additional attention
Clarification as the rework type, and
one or more bases for the report’s return from the AVAILABLE REWORK REASONS drop-down menu, and
entering a clear description of the issue(s) needing clarification or resolution in the DETAILED RATIONALE FOR REWORK field.
Important:  When submitting a clarification rework request for a contract examination, it is recommended to cite the exact language in the DBQ that requires clarification and specify the clarification(s) needed.
Reference:  For more information on when an examination report would need clarification, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.c.
presents an opinion or diagnosis that conflicts with other evidence of record and the conflict cannot be resolved via review of the evidentiary record
input a new medical opinion DBQ request in VBMS.
 
Important:  
Avoid using language that can be construed as adversarial when returning reports for clarification.  Use the term insufficient for rating purposesrather than inadequate examination.
An examination scheduling request (ESR) must be in a Completed status before a rework request can be submitted in VBMS.  
Note:  Contract examination providers have a maximum of 14 days to clarify any insufficiency to avoid an insufficiency call.  If the insufficiency or need for clarification is not rectified within the time allotted, the examination will be deemed insufficient.
References:  For more information on 
navigation of and data entry in VBMS, see the VBMS Core User Guide
entering a rework request in VBMS, see the Exam Management System (EMS) User Guide, and
when a rework request in VBMS is not appropriate, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.g.

IV.i.3.C.1.g.  Determining Whether a Rework Request or New ESR in VBMS Is Required

If necessary information was not requested in the original ESR, a new ESR must be submitted.  It is not appropriate to return an examination report as a rework request in VBMS to obtain new information that was not requested on the original ESR.  
Refer to the table below for guidance on whether an examination rework request in VBMS is appropriate or a new ESR is required.
If a(n) ...
Then a ...
specific DBQ is deemed necessary but was not included in or triggered by the request on the original ESR
new ESR is required, and 
rework request in VBMS is not appropriate.
Example:  The original ESR requested a Shoulder and Arm Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire for the claimed condition of arm pain, but the claims processor determines an Elbow and Forearm Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire is required instead.
medical opinion is deemed necessary but the specific opinion required was not requested on the original ESR
new ESR is required, and
rework request in VBMS is not appropriate.
Example:  A direct medical opinion was requested on the original ESR but, after review, the claims processor determines an aggravation medical opinion is needed.
examination is needed for a contention not included on the original ESR
new ESR is required, and
rework request in VBMS is not appropriate.
Examples:
The claims processor missed a contention that requires an examination when entering the original ESR.
After the original ESR was entered, a subsequent claim was received for an additional contention that requires an examination.
examination is needed for one or more contention(s) and/or specific DBQ(s) not included on the original ESR, but
examination for the additional contention(s) and/or completion of the additional DBQ(s) is triggered by the findings and examiner instructions on the originally requested DBQ(s)
new ESR is not required, and
rework request in VBMS is appropriate.
Example:  The original ESR requested a Diabetes Mellitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire for the claimed condition of diabetes.  At the time of examination, the Veteran reported symptoms of peripheral neuropathy, which would trigger the examiner to also complete the Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  However, the examiner failed to complete the Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy Disability Benefits Questionnaire.
 
Analysis:  This is an insufficient examination as the examiner did not follow the instructions in the Diabetes Mellitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire, and a rework request should be submitted in VBMS as directed in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.1.f.
Note:  If a rework request is submitted in VBMS to a contract vendor but a newESR should have been submitted instead, the vendor will send the ESR rework request back as a request for clarification with instructions seeking the submission of a new ESR.  
Reference:  For more information on requests for clarification on examinations requested through VBMS, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.10.c.

IV.i.3.C.1.h.  Handling Non-VA Hospital Reports That Are Insufficient for Rating Purposes
 
Request clarification of any hospital report that is insufficient for rating purposes and is received from a
State hospital
county hospital
municipal hospital
contract hospital, or
private hospital.
Important:  Authorize a VA examination if a satisfactory corrected report cannot be obtained within a reasonable period of time.

IV.i.3.C.1.i.  Requesting Clarification From Private Physicians
 
VA, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. 5103A(a), has a duty to return for clarification unclear or insufficient private examination reports or VA progress notes if it reasonably appears that a request for clarification could provide relevant information necessary to properly decide a claim that is otherwise not in the record and cannot be obtained in some other way.  VA’s duty is limited to those instances in which the missing information is relevant, factual, and objective – not a matter of opinion – and bears greatly on the probative value of the private medical examination report. 
 
If a private medical examination report reasonably appears to contain information necessary to properly decide a claim, but is unclear or not suitable for rating purposes and the information contained in the report otherwise cannot be obtained, VA has a duty to either 
ask the private examiner to clarify the report
request that the claimant obtain the necessary information to clarify the report
request a VA examination or medical opinion to remedy the lacking element(s), or
explain why clarification is not needed. 
Any request for clarification to a private examiner or claimant should clearly indicate what further action needs to be taken to make the insufficient private examination report acceptable for VA consideration.  If no response is received from the private examiner or claimant, continue adjudicating the claim. 
Note:  When an examination or opinion is requested to remedy a lacking element, the exam and/or opinion may be requested specific to only the lacking element.  A complete examination need not be requested to remedy a lacking element when the evidence of record will otherwise be sufficient once the examination or opinion is received.
 
References:  For more information on
requesting clarification of medical reports, see 
38 CFR 4.2, and
Savage v.Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 259 (2011)
handling privately completed DBQs, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A, and
requesting non-Federal or private records, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C.2.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, Chapter 1, Section A - General Information on the Rating Activity
Article ID: 554400000180477
Updated Nov 19, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview 

In This Section
 
This section contains the topic "Rating Activity Organization."

1.  Rating Activity Organization
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information on rating activity organization, including
definition of the rating activity
specific issues requiring a rating decision
rating activity leadership, and 
responsibilities of rating activity leadership.

Change Date
 
August 8, 2024

V.i.1.A.1.a.  Definition:  Rating Activity
 
The rating activity is a group of qualified employees vested with the authority to make formal decisions, called rating decisions, and take other actions on claims that require a rating decision. 
 
Important:  Fiduciary hub personnel vested with expanded authority may also complete certain incompetency rating decisions.
 
References:  For more information on
categories of claims that require a rating decision, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, 1.A.1.b
the rating decision, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A, and 
jurisdiction for competency determinations, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.A.1.a.

V.i.1.A.1.b.  Specific Issues Requiring a Rating Decision 

The rating activity is responsible for decisions on the following major issues relating to entitlement:
service connection of diseases and injuries
evaluation of disabilities
relationship of service-connected (SC) diseases or injuries to causes of death, including suicide
competency or incompetency
whether or not a Veteran was insane at the time of the commission of offenses that would otherwise constitute a bar to benefits for character of discharge purposes
whether a potential beneficiary was insane at the time of a murder, in cases involving a homicide
permanent incapacity of a child for self-support
incurrence of additional disability or death under 38 U.S.C. 1151 due to
hospital, medical or surgical treatment, or
vocational rehabilitation or examination
if required by the need for retroactive determination for a period prior to July 1, 1973, whether or not a disability incurred or aggravated in peacetime was a direct result of the Veteran being engaged in
armed conflict, or
extra-hazardous service
if the Veteran served fewer than 90 days, whether release was due to an SC disability or if, at the time of discharge, the Veteran had an SC disability which would have justified discharge for disability under 38 CFR 3.3
permanent and total disability in claims for pension, as well as entitlement to housebound or aid and attendance (A&A) benefits under 38 CFR 3.3and 38 CFR 3.351, and
entitlement to allowance for
A&A if claimed by a surviving spouse or surviving parent, and
housebound for surviving spouses in receipt of Dependency and Indemnity Compensation or Survivors Pension in accordance with M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 2.B.2.b.
 References:  For more information on
a Veteran who was insane at the time of commission of an offense, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 2.A, and
the authorization activity’s ability to 
grant A&A based solely on the claimant being a patient in a nursing home, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 1.B.2.a
deny a claim if the claimant does not meet one or more of the eligibility factors for a benefit, see 
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.A.1.f, and
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.B.3.d, and 
deny death benefits without a rating decision, see M21-1, Part XI, Subpart ii, 1.1.b.

V.i.1.A.1.c.  Rating Activity Leadership
 
The rating activity operates under the direction of
a division manager such as a Veterans Service Center Manager, Pension Management Center Manager, or Fiduciary Hub Manager, or
another designated individual.

V.i.1.A.1.d.  Responsibilities of Rating Activity Leadership
 
Rating activity leadership
determines which employees will serve as part of the rating activity (to include on temporary detail) to the extent consistent with personnel requirements
monitors the quality of rating decisions
determines which members of the rating activity are eligible or ineligible for single-signature authority
determines which rating issues require a second signature by reason of being special or complex
establishes suitable controls to ensure that the rating workload is distributed efficiently and equitably, and
delegates or performs approval/concurrence tasks and case referrals as appropriate. 
References:  For more information on
rating decision signature requirements, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7, and
the quality of rating decisions, see M21-4, Chapter 3, 6, 7, and 8.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, Chapter 1, Section B - Referrals to the Rating Activity
Article ID: 554400000180478
Updated Nov 19, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview
 

In This Section

This section contains the topic “Referring Claims to the Rating Activity After Development Is Complete.”

  
1.  Referring Claims to the Rating Activity After Development Is Complete
 

Change Date
 
April 24, 2015

V.i.1.B.1.a.  Referring Claims to the Rating Activity After Development Is Complete
 
If the issue requires a rating decision and a claimant is
otherwise eligible for benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and
VA has received new, competent medical or lay evidence in support of the claim,
refer the claim to the rating activity after all development actions, to include VA examinations as necessary, are complete.
  
Note:  Although evidence to decide all contentions associated with the Veteran’s claim may not be of record, the rating activity should decide any contention for which sufficient evidence exists to award the benefit sought. 
  
Exception:  If a claimant is seeking service connection for the cause of death or for a disability, VA may not deny a claim until it has obtained the Veteran’s service treatment records (STRs) or determined the STRs are unavailable.  If VA determines the STRs are unavailable, refer the claim to the rating activity after all other development actions are complete, even if VA received no medical or lay evidence in support of the claim.
  
References:  For more information on
developing for STRs, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 2.A-H
using the Personnel Information Exchange System (PIES) to develop for STRs, see the PIES User Guide
final notification to claimants regarding the unavailability of STRs, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.g
the rating activity, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, 1.A
specific issues requiring a rating decision, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, 1.A.1.b
partial rating decisions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.B, and 
identifying the issues, to include inferred issues, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, Chapter 1, Section C - Pre-Rating Review of Claims by the Rating Activity
Article ID: 554400000180479
Updated Nov 17, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview 

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Confirming Rating Activity Jurisdiction
2
Reviewing for Compliance With the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) Duty to Notify and Assist
3
Handling Claims Unsupported by Law


1.  Confirming Rating Activity Jurisdiction
 
 

Change Date

May 15, 2017

V.i.1.C.1.a.  Pre-Rating Review to Confirm Rating Activity Jurisdiction

The rating activity must review cases routed for a rating decision to confirm that the claimed issues require a rating decision in accordance with M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, 1.A.1.b.
 
Before issuing a rating decision, the rating activity must also ensure that any needed administrative decisions, such as a line-of-duty determination, have been completed and authorized.
 
References:  For more information on
the rating activity generally, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, 1.A
referrals to the rating activity, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, 1.B
determining the issues, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A
partial rating decisions and deferred issues, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.B
administrative decisions, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.C, and
establishing Veteran status, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.A.

2.  Reviewing for Compliance With VA’s Duty to Notify and Assist
  
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on considering VA’s duty to notify and assist, including
duty to notify review by the rating activity, and
duty to assist review by the rating activity.

Change Date

November 17, 2025

V.i.1.C.2.a.  Duty to Notify Review by the Rating Activity

The decision maker is responsible for ensuring that the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) duty to notify has been satisfied before proceeding to a decision.  Use the table below to review the evidence of record and ensure VA’s duty to notify requirements have been met.
 
If …
Then review …
VA receives a claim on the prescribed form
the form to ensure it is substantially complete, and
the claim to ensure it is not inherently incredible or lacking merit. 
References:  For more information on
substantially complete application, see 
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.f
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C, and
38 CFR 3.159(a)(3), and
action required on claims that are inherently incredible or lack merit, see
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.c, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.f.
the form is substantially complete
to determine whether Section 5103 notice requirements have been met under the guidance in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B.
References:  For more information on
notification requirements for a complete application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.a
when the duty to notify has already been provided on the application form or through filing, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B.1.b
circumstances where a Section 5103 notice may need to be provided after a claim is submitted, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B.1.c, and
exceptions to the Section 5103 notice requirement, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B.1.d.
VA becomes aware of the existence of relevant records before the claim is decided
the claims folder to ensure that VA has notified the claimant
of the relevant records
of the need for a release of records (if applicable), and
to obtain the records and provide them to VA if the claimant does not provide the necessary release.
evidence requested by VA from a third party does not exist or cannot be obtained
the claims folder to ensure that VA has
identified the records that could not be obtained
explained the efforts VA made to obtain the records
described any further action VA will take regarding the claim, including, but not limited to notice that VA will decide the claim based on the evidence of record unless the claimant submits the records VA was unable to obtain, and
indicated that the claimant is ultimately responsible for providing the evidence. 
Note:  For non-Federal records requests, VA may provide the notice at the same time it makes a follow-up attempt to obtain the relevant records.
a proposed adverse action is referred for final decision
the notice of proposed adverse action to ensure all the elements of due process have been met.
 
References:  For more information on
due process, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.B, and
the notice of proposed adverse action, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.A.
 
References:  For more information on
notifying the claimant of necessary information or evidence, see 38 CFR 3.159(b)
notifying the claimant when records cannot be obtained, see
38 CFR 3.159(e), and
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C.3, and
ensuring that notification has been sent through the Centralized Benefits Communications Management (CBCM) program, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.C.4.c, and
the Talent Management System (TMS) course titled Centralized Benefits Communications Management (VA 4562424).

V.i.1.C.2.b.  Duty to Assist Review by the Rating Activity

The decision maker is responsible for ensuring that the duty to assist has been satisfied before proceeding to a decision.  Use the table below to review the evidence of record and ensure VA’s duty to assist requirements have been met.
 
If the information or evidence is …
Then ensure VA …
needed in support of a benefit-specific or special-issue claim type (for example, individual unemployability or service connection for hepatitis)
notified the claimant
of any additional forms or special-issue evidence needed to support the claim
how the forms/evidence can be obtained/presented, and
when the forms/evidence must be received.
Reference:  For more information on notification requirements for special issues, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.B.1.f.
requested from Federal agencies
received complete records, or
if the records were not obtained, determined that they do not exist or additional efforts would be futile. 
Reference:  For more information on duty to assist with Federal records, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.a, and
38 CFR 3.159(c)(2).
requested from the claimant and/or private providers
received complete records, or
if the records are not received, made reasonable efforts to obtain them. 
References:  For more information on
reasonable efforts to obtain non-Federal records, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C.2, and
38 CFR 3.159(c)(1), and
claimants' cooperation with the duty to assist in obtaining non-Federal records, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C.2.c, and
38 CFR 3.159(c)(1)(i).
VA medical records
obtained all VA medical records pertinent to the issues, and
associated them with the electronic claims folder. 
Note:  Vet Center records require the Veteran’s authorization to release records and are not stored in the Compensation and Pension Record Interchange (CAPRI).
 
References:  For more information on
obtaining VA medical records, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 1.A.2
storing records from CAPRI, see the CAPRI User Manual, and
obtaining records from a Vet Center, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.e.
an examination request
requested all examinations and medical opinions, when required, and
included the correct information to the examiner in the request(s). 
Reference:  For more information on VA’s duty to provide medical examinations or medical opinions, see
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A, and
38 CFR 3.159(c)(4).
an examination report
received a complete examination report that is sufficient for rating purposes, or
received notice that the claimant failed to report. 
References:  For more information on
reviewing examination reports for sufficiency, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A and B, and
failure to report for scheduled examinations, see
38 CFR 3.655
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 2.B.
 
References:  For more information on 
circumstances where VA will refrain from or discontinue providing assistance, see 38 CFR 3.159(d), and
ensuring that notification has been sent through the CBCM program, see
M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.C.4.c, and
the TMS course titled Centralized Benefits Communications Management (VA 4562424).  

 
                                                                                                                                
3.  Handling Claims Unsupported by Law

Introduction

This topic contains information on handling claims unsupported by law, including
referring to the authorization activity claims that are unsupported by law, and
dismissing claims unsupported by law.

Change Date

April 9, 2018

V.i.1.C.3.a.  Referring to the Authorization Activity Claims That Are Unsupported by Law

Refer a claim to the authorization activity for an administrative denial of benefits when the claimed entitlement is unsupported by law.
 
Example:  Such claims include pension claims from Veterans with only peacetime service.
 
Reference:  For more information on conditions under which the authorization activity may deny a claim, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.A.3.b and c.

V.i.1.C.3.b.  Dismissing Claims Unsupported by Law

When a claim is unsupported by law, the claim
should be dismissed as a result of the lack of legal merit
does not require any development action, and
does not require a rating decision. 
Note:  The claim must clearly be unsupported by law to be dismissed. 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 1, Section A - Principles of Reviewing and Weighing Evidence
Article ID: 554400000014383
Updated May 27, 2025

﻿﻿<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Guidelines for Evaluating Evidence
2
Evidentiary Concepts
3
Medical Evidence
4
Evidence From Non-Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Sources
5
Weighing the Evidence
6
Decision-Making Attitude


1.  Guidelines for Evaluating Evidence
 

Introduction

This topic includes information about the guidelines for evaluating evidence, including
definition(s) of 
evidence
rules of evidence, and
findings of fact and conclusions of law
circumstances in which to evaluate evidence
attitude when evaluating evidence
overview of evaluating evidence
rating activity responsibility for reviewing evidence
provisions applied by the rating activity in evaluating evidence
standards of evidentiary proof
reasonable doubt rule, and
role of presumptive provisions.

Change Date

August 6, 2020

V.ii.1.A.1.a.  Definition:  Evidence

Evidence is every type of proof offered to establish a fact. 
The table below describes the different types of evidence. 
Evidence
Description
testimonial
oral and written statements
documentary
documents
real
a tangible object, usually playing some role in an event, from which the fact finder may draw inferences 
 
Example:  A prescription medicine container may prove evidence of a diagnosis or treatment.
demonstrative
evidence that illustrates testimony of a witness 
 
Examples:  a map, diagram, or re-enactment
direct
evidence capable by itself of proving a fact or issue
circumstantial
evidence that may allow the fact finder to deduce a certain fact from other facts that can be proven


V.ii.1.A.1.b.  Definition:  Rules of Evidence

Rules of evidence are guidelines on evaluation of the evidence submitted or obtained in a case.  These rules dictate whether evidence may be admitted or considered, when particular evidence can prove a matter, and when evidence is entitled to more value or less value than other evidence in the record.
 
A body of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regulations, directives, and court precedent exists on use of evidence in VA adjudication actions.  The decision maker must apply these rules of evidence in reaching a decision on a case.
Notes: 
The codified Federal rules of evidence used in Federal court proceedings do not apply in VA proceedings.   
VA is a completely ex-parte system of adjudication, meaning the VA is responsible for fully and sympathetically developing the Veteran’s claim and resolving all issues by giving the claimant the benefit of any reasonable doubt, in the absence of such adversarial concepts as cross examination, best evidence rule, and strict adherence to burden of proof.
A VA General Counsel precedent opinion is considered an administrative issue for effective date purposes as indicated in VAOPGCPREC 88-1990, 38 U.S.C. 5110(g), and 38 CFR 3.114.
Generally, rules announced in precedent judicial decisions apply to all cases that are still open on direct review when the new rule is announced.  Unless they state otherwise, statutes and regulations are presumed to apply prospectively (in the future).
Exception:  Precedential decisions that result in “genuinely retroactive effects” in which application of the new decision impairs rights the party originally had, increases the party’s liability for past conduct, imposes new duties with respect to prior transactions, or attaches new legal consequences to events that occurred before the enactment do not apply to cases still open on direct review as indicated in VAOPGCPREC 7-2003.
 
Reference:  For more information on rules of evidence, see
Flynn v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 500, 503 (1994), and
Manio v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 140 (1991). 

V.ii.1.A.1.c.  Definitions: Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law

Findings of fact are the true facts that a decision maker finds to exist after the analysis of all evidence of record.  Findings of fact are necessary to making the conclusions of law.
Conclusions of law are the ultimate determinations made regarding whether key governing substantive and/or procedural legal requirements defined by the claim are proven.  Every legal conclusion depends on finding certain facts. 

V.ii.1.A.1.d.  Circumstances in Which to Evaluate Evidence

The decision maker will evaluate evidence after verifying that the claim has been properly developed and procedurally prepared for a decision but before a written decision on the issues is drafted. 
Verifying that the claim is properly developed and procedurally prepared for a decision involves making sure that
all issues were recognized
the duty to notify was discharged
the duty to assist was completed or otherwise appropriately discharged, and
the appropriate procedures were followed when any other due process requirement was implicated by the facts in the case. 
Reference:  For more information on the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS), see the VBMS Core User Guide.

V.ii.1.A.1.e.  Attitude When Evaluating Evidence

When evaluating evidence and making decisions
maintain objectivity
never allow personal feelings to enter into the decision-making process, and
show fairness and courtesy at all times to claimants.
Note:  An antagonistic, critical, or even abusive attitude on the part of the claimant should not in any way influence the handling of the case.
Reference:  For more information on the attitude of the rating officers, see 38 CFR 4.23.

V.ii.1.A.1.f.  Overview of Evaluating Evidence

Evaluating evidence refers to a series of analytical steps that must be performed by a VA decision maker in making findings of fact for the purpose of drawing conclusions of law on each aspect or criterion of the legal standard for entitlement to the benefit and on applicable procedural matters.
Follow the steps in the table below when evaluating evidence.
Step
Action
1
Determine what facts are required and what standard of proof applies based on the criteria for entitlement to the specific benefit sought and the procedural issue (original, new, increase, supplemental, presumption, proposed adverse action, and stabilization).
2
Discount any admitted evidence that is not material to (that does not relate to) the components of the entitlement standard or procedural issue at issue in the case.
3
Determine the probative value of evidence that bears on the entitlement standard or procedural issue. This means deciding to which extent those items of evidence are relevant in tending to make the matter more probable or less probable.
Discuss and apply VA guidance (including court precedents) on competency to determine whether the evidence from a particular source can establish a particular fact that requires the application of special expertise or first-hand knowledge of facts based on recollection or perception. Evidence from a source not having the requisite competency to offer a particular type of evidence has no probative value.
Discuss and apply VA guidance on credibility where there is a reasonable factual basis (for example, demonstrable bias or inconsistency) for questioning believability. Evidence that is not believable does not have probative value.
4
Resolve questions of relative weight or persuasiveness when there are various items of evidence that have been determined to have probative value in order to find facts (to determine what facts the evidence proves).
Note:  It is important to explain why certain evidence was accepted as more probative than other evidence, especially when giving less value to evidence tending to support the benefit sought by the claimant/beneficiary.
5
Apply the found facts to draw corresponding conclusions of law necessary to support the decision outcome for the benefit sought and procedural issue. Clearly explain in the rating decision why the evidence is found to be persuasive or unpersuasive.
Reference:  For more information on documenting unmet elements and favorable findings in a rating decision, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A.5.
Reference:  For more information on evidentiary concepts of admissibility, credibility, and probative value of evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.

V.ii.1.A.1.g.  Rating Activity Responsibility for Reviewing Evidence

The rating activity is responsible for reviewing the evidence, including
recognizing the need for evidence in relation to a claim, and
determining the
admissibility of the evidence
weight to be afforded evidence that is presented
need for additional evidence, and
sufficiency of and/or need for a physical examination.
Reference:  For more information on determining who has authority to request examinations and/or medical opinions, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.1.

V.ii.1.A.1.h.  Provisions Applied by the Rating Activity in Evaluating Evidence

When making decisions or taking action on claims that require a rating decision, the rating activity must apply the provisions of all pertinent
laws
regulations
schedules for rating disabilities
policy statements
procedures
administrators’ decisions
Secretaries’ decisions
Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) precedents, and
other legal precedents governing VA.

V.ii.1.A.1.i.    Standards of Evidentiary Proof

Every substantive or procedural factual matter must have a standard of proof whether stated explicitly or not.  Standard of proof specifies the degree of persuasion or confidence in the evidence with regard to the subject of the proof that is required in order to find a fact proven.
Note:  The application of standard of proof is qualitative, not quantitative.  The question is weight or persuasiveness of the evidence and not the number of items of evidence.  Evidence is not necessarily in relative equipoise when the number of acceptable items of evidence tending to support a fact is equal to the number of items tending to not support a fact.  
The table below describes the different standards of evidentiary proof. 
Standard
Description
relative equipoise
Evidence must persuade the decision maker that the fact is as likely as not.
preponderance of the evidence
The greater weight of evidence is that the fact exists. The fact is more likely than not.
affirmative evidence to the contrary
The fact is unlikely; and the evidence against the matter is of greater weight. This standard is the opposite of the preponderance standard.
clear and convincing
The fact finder has reasonable certainty of the truth of a fact. This is a higher standard of proof than having to find a fact is more likely than not.
clear and unmistakable
The evidence must establish the fact without question.


V.ii.1.A.1.j.      Reasonable Doubt Rule

The reasonable doubt rule means that the evidence provided by the claimant/beneficiary (or obtained on the claimant’s/beneficiary’s behalf) must only persuade the decision maker that each factual matter is at least as likely as not. 
It is the defined and consistently applied policy of the VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case.  When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.
In Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 49 (1990), CAVC noted that an equipoise decision is
necessarily more qualitative than quantitative; it is one not capable of mathematical precision and certitude.  Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of material contained in the record; every item of evidence does not have the same probative value.
CAVC further likened the reasonable doubt rule as akin to the principle in baseball that the “tie goes to the runner.”
Reference:  For more information on the reasonable doubt rule, see
38 CFR 3.102, and
38 CFR 4.3.

V.ii.1.A.1.k.  Role of Presumptive Provisions

Presumptive provisions alleviate part of the claimant’s burden of proof.  Where certain facts are proven, a presumption arises that additional facts are true unless the presumption is rebutted by other evidence. 
As noted by Routen v. West, 142 F.3d 1434, 1439 (Fed.Cir.1998), a presumption has evidentiary value, but it is not a form of evidence.  It is a legal mechanism that relieves a party from having to produce evidence sufficient to establish the point at issue.  As noted by the Routen analysis, when the predicate evidence is established, the remaining evidentiary gap is filled by the presumption. 
VA presumptions may be rebutted.  This means that when proof to the contrary of the evidentiary matter relieved by the presumption exists in the record, the presumption may be rebutted.  When the presumption is rebutted, the burden shifts back to the claimant seeking the benefit to prove the facts with evidence.
VA presumptions include the presumptions of
soundness
aggravation, and 
service connection (SC). 
References:  For more information on the
presumption of soundness, see
38 U.S.C. 1111, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.2
presumption of aggravation, see
38 U.S.C. 1153, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.C.2, and
presumption of SC, see
38 U.S.C. 1112, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.B.

2.  Evidentiary Concepts
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about evidentiary concepts, including
admissibility of evidence
definition of 
credibility 
competent evidence, and
probative value
determining the probative value of evidence
definitions of positive and negative evidence
absence of evidence, and
court holdings on 
negative or absent evidence, and
negative evidence and the duty to assist.

Change Date
 
November 30, 2021

V.ii.1.A.2.a.  Admissibility of Evidence
 
Admissibility refers to whether offered evidence is accepted and made part of the official evidentiary record, which, for VA claims, is 
the claims folder, and
all electronic records associated with the processing of a claim.
With a few exceptions, all evidence submitted is admitted into the record.  There are a few exceptions for
unsworn or uncertified testimony
duplicate copies of records, and
evidence submitted in support of a request for higher-level review (HLR).
References:  For more information on
managing evidence in the electronic claims folder, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.A
inclusion of permanent notes as a part of the official record, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.c
definitions of electronic claims folder and paper claims folder and the materials included therein, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.b and c, and
HLRs, see M21-5, Chapter 5.

V.ii.1.A.2.b.  Definition:  Credibility
 
Credibility is a blanket term for the fact finding of whether evidence is believable or not believable. 
There is generally not a formal presumption of credibility.  However, as a matter of policy, VA decision makers should accept evidence at face value unless called into question by other evidence of record or sound medical or legal principles.  
VA decision makers are expected to make credibility determinations when credibility is raised by the evidence available.
Exception:  When determining whether evidence is new and relevant in connection with a supplemental claim, presume that the evidence is credible.  However, once the new and relevant determination has been made, assess the evidence as usual for credibility, competence, and weight.
Factors to consider in making a fact finding of credibility include
facial plausibility
consistency with other evidence submitted
internal consistency
demeanor of a witness (who is offering in person testimonial evidence), and
interest/bias.
Example:  Veteran submits a statement as part of his claim that he injured his low back in the Air Force while loading cargo onto a C-130 aircraft during an exercise in July 2002.  Personnel records reveal the Veteran served in the Air Force as a loadmaster and participated in a military exercise in the Philippines in July 2002. 
Analysis:  The Veteran’s statement, when viewed along with the evidence of record, appears believable.  Therefore, the statement is credible.  
Example:  Veteran submits a statement along with his claim indicating he injured his low back during multiple parachute jumps in the Army from 1980 through 1983.  Personnel records reveal Veteran’s occupation during service was “clerk.”  There were no records indicating that the Veteran was involved in parachuting operations.
Analysis:  The Veteran’s statement, when viewed with other evidence, is not believable.  Therefore, the statement is not credible.
Reference:  For more information on findings of credibility, see 
Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 508 (1995), and
Justus v. Principi, 3 Vet.App. 510 (1992).   

V.ii.1.A.2.c.  Definition:  Competent Evidence
 
Competent evidence refers generally to evidence offered from a qualified source.  A determination of evidentiary competency involves analysis of whether a person offering evidence is qualified to establish a matter.
 
Competent medical evidence means evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions.  Competent medical evidence may also mean statements conveying sound medical principles found in medical treatises.  It would also include statements contained in authoritative writings such as medical and scientific articles and research reports or analyses.
Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.
References:  For more information on
competent medical evidence, see 38 CFR 3.159(a)(1), and
competent lay evidence, see 38 CFR 3.159(a)(2).

V.ii.1.A.2.d.  Definition:        Probative Value
 
Evidence has probative value if it
makes a matter material to the determination more or less likely, and
has sufficient weight, either by itself or in combination with other evidence, to persuade the decision maker about a fact.

V.ii.1.A.2.e.  Determining the Probative Value of Evidence
 
The following factors are important considerations in determining the probative value of evidence: 
competency
credibility
thoroughness
precision
relevancy, and 
date of the evidence. 
Evidence that is incredible (not believable) does not have probative value and is not weighed against probative evidence in determining if the facts are proven.  Evidence from a source that is not competent to establish a fact does not have probative value on that fact.
Consider the key elements listed below when evaluating the probative value and relative weight of medical evidence such as a diagnosis/assessment, prognosis, or opinion on etiology/onset
physician’s qualifications
expertise/specialty, and
experience
physician’s knowledge of the relevant history
the accuracy or validity of history provided by the patient or examinee
review of records and other evidence, or
length of time the physician has treated the Veteran
context in which the medical evidence was created
treatment, or
substantiation of a medical disability claim
reasoning employed by the physician
theory
observation
practice
clinical testing
subjective report, and
conjecture
degree of specificity, and
degree of certainty.

V.ii.1.A.2.f.  Definitions:  Positive and Negative Evidence
 
Both positive and negative evidence may have probative value.
Positive evidence means actual items of evidence that affirmatively support a claimant’s position. 
Negative evidence means
actual items of evidence that affirmatively disprove the claimant’s position, or
a negative inference taken from the absence of evidence on a matter supporting the claimant’s position. 

V.ii.1.A.2.g.  Absence of Evidence
 
The absence of evidence on a particular question cannot be construed as substantive negative evidence against a claimant unless there is a foundation in the record that demonstrates that such silence has a tendency to prove or disprove a relevant fact. 
 
A decision maker must first establish a proper foundation for drawing inferences against a claimant from an absence of documentation. Apply the principles below when evaluating the absence of evidence in the record.
Absence of an entry in a record may be evidence against the existence of a fact if such a fact would ordinarily be recorded.
A claimant’s lay statement may be weighed against the absence of contemporary medical evidence.
Important:  Do not use the absence of evidence as negative evidence in cases where the claimant has simply failed to prove an element of the claim by the applicable standard (typically relative equipoise).  However, the absence of any positive evidence, such as medical evidence showing diagnosis or treatment, may be considered in determining whether the benefit may be awarded. 
 
Reference:  For more information on considering the absence of evidence, see
Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 221 (2011)
Horn v. Shineki, 25 Vet.App. 231 (2012)
AZ and AY v. Shinseki, 731F.3d 1303 (2013), and
Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 258 (Fed. Cir. 2015). 

V.ii.1.A.2.h.  Court Holdings on Negative or Absent Evidence
 
The court cases listed below contained significant holdings regarding the consideration of negative or absent evidence.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held in Forshey v. Principi, 284 F.3d 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (en banc), that all evidence bearing on a question, whether positive or negative, could be considered.  The Federal Circuit concluded that it was permissible for VA to consider negative evidence tending to disprove the existence of a cause other than alcohol intoxication of a fatal accident (the road was dry, the weather was clear, the accident occurred during daylight, and there was no evidence of malfunction of the vehicle) to rebut the line of duty presumption under 38 U.S.C 105.
The Federal Circuit held in AZ and AY v. Shinseki, 731 F.3d 1303 (Fed.Cir.2013), that the absence of a service record documenting an unreported sexual assault or a Veteran’s failure to have reported an alleged assault in service may not be treated as pertinent evidence that the assault did not occur. 
The Federal Circuit held in Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2000), that when rebutting the presumption of aggravation for a condition incurred during combat, 38 U.S.C. 1154(b) permits consideration of the entire medical history, including a lengthy period of absence of complaint following service about the claimed condition.
The Federal Circuit held in Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006), that the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (BVA) erred in determining that lay evidence lacked credibility merely because it was unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.  Lay evidence may be rejected, when appropriate, due to such findings as possible bias or conflicting statements, and BVA may also consider and weigh the absence of contemporary medical records against the lay evidence of record.  However, this case found that the lack of contemporaneous medical records, in and of itself, does not render lay evidence incredible. 
Reference:  For more information on the application of the concept of negative evidence to claims based on sexual assault, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.E.1.c.

V.ii.1.A.2.i.  Court Holdings on Negative Evidence and the Duty to Assist
 
CAVC held in McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 79 (2006), that medical evidence that suggests a nexus but is too equivocal or lacking in specificity to support a decision on the merits still triggers the duty to assist under 38 U.S.C. 5103A(d) regarding medical examinations/opinions if it indicates that the Veteran’s condition “may be associated” with service. 
CAVC, in Trafter v. Shinseki, 26 Vet.App. 267 (2013), held that VA is precluded from considering the absence of evidence as substantive negative evidence to decide that VA has complied with duty-to-assist provisions. 

3.  Medical Evidence
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about medical evidence, including
treating physician’s treatment background and probative value
definitions of types of medical assessments
medical assessments – history and policy applications
disability benefits questionnaires (DBQs) and acceptable clinical evidence (ACE)
basis for rejecting medical evidence
supporting medical conclusions with evidence in the claims folder
requirement for supporting rationale for medical opinions 
restrictions on the rating activity’s involvement in providing medical evidence
considering former prisoner of war (FPOW) protocol examination reports
evaluating service treatment records (STRs), and 
statements from physicians as acceptable evidence for rating purposes without further examination. 

Change Date
 
July 1, 2022

V.ii.1.A.3.a.  Treating Physician’s Treatment Background and Probative Value
 
VA does not apply the “treating physician rule,” whereby the evidence of a treating physician is generally entitled to more weight than evaluations made by consulting physicians or expert witnesses.  However, a treating physician’s familiarity with the history of a disability may increase the probative value of any medical evidence/opinion. 
 
Reference:  For more information on determining a physician’s expertise and experience, see Black v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 279 (1997).

V.ii.1.A.3.b.  Definitions:  Types of Medical Assessments
 
The main types of medical assessments for VA purposes are diagnoses, opinions, examination, and history.
 
Diagnoses are medical assessments made typically to identify injury or disease.  They are typically the end result of an examination and involve the application of the physician or examiner’s knowledge, experience, and judgment to a set of facts. 
 
Opinions are medical assessments on questions such as etiology or onset.  They may or may not be accompanied by a contemporaneous examination.  However, like an examination, opinions involve the application of the examiner’s knowledge, experience, and judgment to a set of facts. 
 
An examination for VA purposes involves the collection of relevant medical facts (history, clinical observations, or measurements and, potentially, lab testing) by a medical professional. 
 
History is a verbal recounting or written record of relevant life events, habits, routine, symptoms, and/or treatment.  It most often comes from the patient’s oral report and/or review of medical records.  Other materials could also be relevant to a physician’s or examiner’s understanding of relevant medical or psychological history.

V.ii.1.A.3.c.  Medical Assessments – History and Policy Applications
 
A key evidentiary concern in many VA claims is evaluating the probative value and weight of a diagnosis or opinion that relies upon a claimant’s history.
 
The claimant’s self-interest in the outcome of a medical assessment and ability to recollect facts over time both raise concerns about whether history is accurate and, therefore, whether medical assessments are valid.  However, as a general principle, unless the historical facts upon which a medical conclusion is based are dubious or untenable, the medical conclusion should be accepted as credible.  The probative value of this medical evidence may be considered and weighed relative to other evidence of record. 
In most cases, medical diagnoses and opinions are based to some degree on history provided by the patient or examinee.  Medical assessments based on the claimant’s history generally shall be accepted as credible unless the evidence proves the medical history is inaccurate.  However, an examiner’s conclusion that merely echoes the reported history of a claimant, without offering any medical rationale in support, cannot be deemed an adequate medical opinion and should not be assigned any probative value. 
 
Reference:  For more information on claimant’s history in medical opinions, see
Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 458 (1993), and
Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet.App. 427 (2006). 

V.ii.1.A.3.d.  DBQs and ACE
 
Disability benefits questionnaires (DBQs) and acceptable clinical evidence (ACE) constitute medical evidence that is sufficient for rating purposes unless the nature of the specific disability renders ACE review insufficient in providing an accurate and complete disability picture. 
 
Under ACE, VA clinicians complete a DBQ by reviewing existing paper and/or electronic medical evidence and can supplement it with information obtained during a telephone interview with the Veteran.  This alleviates the need for the Veteran to report to an in-person examination.  The ACE Process is not available for use by non-VA examiners because they do not have electronic access to VA treatment records. 
 
Reference:  For more information on the criteria for and process of scheduling an ACE examination, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.4.

V.ii.1.A.3.e.  Basis for Rejecting Medical Evidence
 
The rating activity may not rely upon its own unsubstantiated medical conclusions to reject expert medical evidence provided by the claimant.
 
Reference:  For more information on the basis for rejecting medical evidence, see
Shipwash v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 218 (1995), and
Colvin v. Derwinski, Vet.App. 175 (1991).

V.ii.1.A.3.f.  Supporting Medical Conclusions With Evidence in the Claims Folder
 
Support medical conclusions with evidence in the claims folder.
 
Cite medical information and reasoning to
link or separate two disabilities, or
establish or refute prior inception or aggravation.
Note:  If evidence such as medical treatises or independent medical opinions (IMO) was relied upon when the rating decision was made, explain this in the rating decision.
 
Reference:  For more information on IMOs, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.E.5.

V.ii.1.A.3.g.  Requirement for Supporting Rationale for Medical Opinions

A medical opinion is a conclusion supported by evidence, including current medical literature, information obtained during examinations, the Veteran’s lay statements, and pertinent evidence in the claims folder.
 
When reviewing medical opinions, ensure the medical opinion responds to all questions asked in the examination request.  Medical reports including opinions must provide a rationale for any opinion rendered.  The rationale should
cite any general medical principles used to support the opinion
identify pertinent medical evidence and case-specific information relied on to support the opinion, and
demonstrate how the opinion was formulated.
A rationale for a medical opinion should include supportive argument for any opinions rendered or conclusions reached with an analysis that can be considered when weighing contradictory or conflicting opinions.  The rationale should provide clear conclusions based upon supporting data and analysis including a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.
 
Notes:
A medical opinion is adequate if it
is based on
a correct factual premise, and
the pertinent medical history and examination
is not ambiguous or inconsistent, and
provides sufficient detail to fully inform the medical question.
Medical reports are to be read as a whole, taking into consideration the history, tests, and examinations upon which the report is based.
Reference:  For more information on the requirements for adequate rationales in medical opinions, see Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97 (2012).

V.ii.1.A.3.h.  Restrictions on the Rating Activity’s Involvement in Providing Medical Evidence 

The rating activity, including those individuals with medical training,
cannot prepare a written opinion concerning a medical question for a rating decision
who examined or treated a claimant may not subsequently perform any rating activity role in a decision involving consideration of the examination or treatment report, and
may not conduct physical examinations during hearings.
Reference:  For more information on the requirement for independent medical evidence to support findings in a rating decision, see
Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 171, 175 (1991)
Tucker v. Derwinski, 2 Vet.App. 201 (1992), and
Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 428, 435 (2011).

V.ii.1.A.3.i.  Considering FPOW Protocol Examination Reports
 
Carefully consider former prisoner of war (FPOW) protocol examination reports because they may provide sufficient background information to relate the Veteran’s current symptomatology to the FPOW experience.

V.ii.1.A.3.j.  Evaluating STRs
 
Service treatment records (STRs) are generally highly probative, but not necessarily determinative, in the resolution of SC.  A current disability and, in some cases, a nexus between the current disability and an injury or disease shown in service will be required to award SC. 

V.ii.1.A.3.k.  Statements From Physicians as Acceptable Evidence for Rating Purposes Without Further Examination
 
A statement from any physician can be accepted for rating purposes without further examination if it
is otherwise sufficient for rating purposes, and 
includes clinical manifestations and substantiation of diagnosis by findings of diagnostic techniques generally accepted by medical authorities. 
Examples:  Diagnostic techniques generally accepted by medical authorities include
pathological studies 
x-rays, and 
appropriate laboratory tests. 

 
4.  Evidence From Non-VA Sources
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about evidence from non-VA sources, including evaluating
evidence from non-VA sources, and 
conflicting evidence. 

Change Date
 
July 15, 2015

V.ii.1.A.4.a.  Evaluating Evidence From Non-VA Sources
 
When evaluating medical and lay evidence from non-VA sources accept it at face value unless there is reason to question its competency or credibility.
 
Non-VA evidence does not have inherently less probative value than evidence originated by VA.  Both VA and non-VA evidence are objectively weighed in determinations of competency, credibility, and probative value.  
Reference:  For more information on reviewing testimony and lay evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.B.

V.ii.1.A.4.b.  Evaluating Conflicting Evidence
 
Use good judgment when evaluating conflicting evidence.
 
Consider
whether witnesses have a personal interest in the issue 
if there is a basis for bias 
if one party had a better opportunity to know the facts, and 
which version is more reasonable and probable. 

 
5.  Weighing the Evidence
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about weighing the evidence, including
assigning weight to the evidence
questions to ask when weighing evidence
handling imbalanced evidence
handling evidence in equipoise
considering reasonable doubt
example of evidence in equipoise, and
reaching a conclusion after weighing evidence.

Change Date
 
July 15, 2015

V.ii.1.A.5.a.  Assigning Weight to the Evidence
 
After assigning weight to the evidence
review the evidence in its totality, and 
determine the balancing of scales. 
Note:  Do not assign weight unjustly or arbitrarily.

V.ii.1.A.5.b.  Questions to Ask When Weighing Evidence
 
Below are examples of questions that should be asked when weighing evidence.
Did the evidence originate in service or in close proximity to service? 
Is the medical opinion supported by clinical data and review of medical records? 
How detailed, clear, or persuasive is the opinion? 
Is the opinion based on personal knowledge or on history provided by another person? 
Reference:  For more information on weighing medical evidence/opinions, see
Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet.App. 295 (2008), and 
Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 120 (2007).  

V.ii.1.A.5.c.  Handling Imbalanced Evidence
 
If the evidence shows an overwhelming imbalance, then the evidence requires a decision in that direction, either for or against awarding the claim.
Note:  The claim must be awarded if all of the evidence is favorable.
Reference:  For more information on awarding benefits when all of the evidence is favorable, see
Traut v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 495 (1994), and 
Rose v. West, 11 Vet.App. 169 (1998).  

V.ii.1.A.5.d.  Handling Evidence in Equipoise
 
As indicated at M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.j, resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant if all procurable evidence, after being weighed, is found in approximate balance or equipoise.  38 CFR 3.102 dictates that the Veteran prevails when the evidence neither satisfactorily proves nor disproves an issue.
Reference:  For more information on applying reasonable doubt, see Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet.App. 518 (1996).

V.ii.1.A.5.e.  Considering Reasonable Doubt
 
Consider reasonable doubt only when the evidence is in equipoise, not when the evidence weighs either in favor or against the claimant.
Notes: 
Per Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1286 (Fed. Cir. 2009), a VA examiner’s statement that an opinion cannot be rendered
provides neither positive nor negative support for the claim, and
does not trigger the application of reasonable doubt. 
Do not characterize an examiner’s statement of being unable to render an opinion as “non-evidence.”  Refer to such evidence in the decision narrative in such terms as having neither positive nor negative value.  
Reference:  For more information on discussing the reasonable doubt rule, see
Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 49 (1990) 
Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001)
Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021), and 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.  

V.ii.1.A.5.f.  Example:   Evidence in Equipoise
 
In the following example, there is no compelling justification to side with either expert: 
Evidence supportive of the claim includes the July 1991 opinion of Dr. T., who treated the Veteran for several years prior to his death, that posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) had been the major factor in the Veteran’s suicide.  Evidence against the claim includes the January 1992 opinion of the VA physician that the evidence did not point to PTSD as the actual cause of suicide and that the Veteran’s suicide had occurred in the setting of alcohol dependence, family breakdown, and depression.
An award of SC for PTSD is warranted based upon the facts of this case as the evidentiary balance is in equipoise. 

V.ii.1.A.5.g.  Reaching a Conclusion After Weighing Evidence
 
After weighing the evidence to reach a conclusion,
discuss the evidence in favor of the claim
discuss the evidence against the claim to include any negative evidence, and
explain that
one set of evidence outweighs the other set, or
the evidence is in equal balance for and against the claim.
Reference:  For more information on negative evidence, see
Forshey v. Principi, 284 F.3d 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (en banc), and
Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2000).

 
6.  Decision-Making Attitude
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about decision-making principles, including
evaluation of evidence, and
decision-making in a non-adversarial system.

Change Date
 
February 19, 2019

V.ii.1.A.6.a.  Evaluation of Evidence
 
When discussing the evaluation of evidence in a decision Narrative, VA decision makers are expected to be appropriately critical of the evidence (including assessing competency and probative value) and to make credibility determinations when credibility is raised by the available evidence.
Decision makers must
be objective and fair in the consideration of evidence 
ensure that any inferences, findings, and conclusions made are supported under the facts and law 
follow the evidentiary guidance in this chapter 
be professional and courteous even when claimants are antagonistic, critical, or abusive 
not allow any bias or personal feelings into the evaluation of evidence or the decision  
not arbitrarily or capriciously refuse to assign weight to a claimant’s evidence, and 
not adopt or express an adversarial position towards a claimant or beneficiary. 
Important: 
Do not refer to the claimant or beneficiary as a liar.  Where evidence is not credible, say that and cite facts of record in support.  
Do not minimize the weight of a treating physician’s opinion based upon the idea that the physician has become an advocate for the patient since doing so may appear adversarial and biased. 

V.ii.1.A.6.b.  Decision-Making in a Non-Adversarial System
 
An adversarial system involves advocates representing contrary positions before an impartial decision maker.  The VA system is non-adversarial.  There is no advocate on behalf of VA opposing claims and no policy to minimize or deny benefits. 
Decision makers are expected to be impartial and liberally apply VA’s pro-Veteran policies, procedures, and regulations in accordance with any applicable VA guidance. 
VA’s policy is to award benefits where supported under the facts and law or when the evidence is in relative equipoise or balance while denying only when we must under the facts and law require it.
Reference:  For more information on the attitude of the rating officers, see 38 CFR 4.23.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 1, Section B - Reviewing Testimony and Lay Evidence
Article ID: 554400000014389
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Reviewing Testimony
2
Lay Evidence


1.  Reviewing Testimony
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information on reviewing testimony, including
using testimony as proper evidence, and
handling unsworn or uncertified testimony.

Change Date
 
October 26, 2018

V.ii.1.B.1.a.  Using Testimony as Proper Evidence
 
To be admitted as proper evidence, certain types of testimony must be sworn under oath or properly certified.
 
Examples:  Evidence from court proceedings, depositions, and so on.

V.ii.1.B.1.b.  Handling Unsworn or Uncertified Testimony
 
Make an exact copy of unsworn or uncertified testimony and return the original copy for notarization or certification to the
claimant
representative, or
person testifying.
Note:  Return unsworn or uncertified testimony only if the rating activity (or a Decision Review Officer) considers the evidence material to a favorable determination of a claim.
 
Reference:  For more information on certifying testimony, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.3.

 
2.  Lay Evidence
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about lay evidence, including
acceptable lay evidence
when to use lay evidence, and
descriptions of symptoms as evidence.

Change Date
 
February 19, 2019

V.ii.1.B.2.a.  Acceptable Lay Evidence
 
Lay evidence is acceptable for the purpose of establishing service incurrence or aggravation, in the absence of service treatment records (STRs), for a combat Veteran or former prisoner of war (FPOW), if the evidence
is satisfactory
is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of combat or FPOW internment, and
can prevail in spite of the absence of official records showing incurrence or aggravation of the disease or injury during service.
Important:  Medical evidence of a link to a current condition is still needed to establish service connection.
 
A non-combat Veteran’s lay statements may be acceptable for establishing service incurrence or aggravation but must be weighed against other evidence in the claims folder including the absence of military records documenting or supporting the statements.
 
References:  For more information on
considering evidence for combat-related disabilities, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A
considering lay evidence, see 38 U.S.C. 1154(a)
a non-combat Veteran’s statements, see Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 36 (2010), and
evaluating STRs, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.3.i.

V.ii.1.B.2.b.  When to Use Lay Evidence
 
Lay evidence is generally afforded probative value if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. 
 
The value accorded to other types of lay evidence depends on such factors as
the accuracy or clarity of the individual’s memory
direct personal knowledge or experience
recency of the event, and
the competence of the reporting person.
A medically-untrained individual is not usually competent to offer a medical opinion regarding the etiology of disorders and such an opinion is generally assigned little probative weight.
 
References:  For more information on
using lay evidence to support a claim, see Espiritu v. Derwinski, 2 Vet.App. 492 (1992), and
definition of lay evidence, see 38 CFR 3.159(a)(2).

V.ii.1.B.2.c.  Descriptions of Symptoms as Evidence

A claimant’s own statement, covering in sufficient detail a condition that is within the claimant's ability to describe, such as their own symptoms, may to that extent constitute evidence.
 
Rationale:  While such statements have self-serving aspects, the claimant is often the most qualified source to describe the circumstances of the disabling effects of the disease or injury.

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->

M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 2, Section A - Direct Service Connection (SC) and Service Incurrence of an Injury
Article ID: 554400000180481
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview
 

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Determining Direct SC
2
Presumption of Soundness and Active Service Requirements
3
Determining Service Incurrence of an Injury


 
1.  Determining Direct SC
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on determining direct SC, including
overview of direct SC
satisfying the current disability requirement for SC
establishing 
direct SC under 3.303(a)
the nexus for direct SC under 3.303(b)
direct SC based on chronicity
SC based on continuity of symptoms, and
direct SC under 38 CFR 3.303(d)
definition of acute and transitory.

Change Date

June 5, 2024

V.ii.2.A.1.a.  Overview of Direct SC

Direct service connection (SC) means that a particular disease or injury was incurred in service.  This is accomplished by affirmatively showing inception during service.  There are three components to proving direct SC.  These are
a current disability
an event, injury, or disease in service, and
a link or nexus establishing that the current disability had its onset or inception in service, which may be established by evidence of
chronicity and continuity as discussed in 38 CFR 3.303(b) for any condition listed in 38 CFR 3.309(a), or
continuous symptoms or a medical nexus opinion as required by 38 CFR 3.303(a).
All pertinent or relevant medical and lay evidence must be considered, including the service records (which may show the places, types, and circumstances of service and the official history of the organization in which the Veteran served). 
 
References:  For more information on
principles relating to SC, see 38 CFR 3.303
principles of reviewing evidence and decision making, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A
reviewing evidence of in-service event, injury, or disease in connection with determining whether an examination is necessary, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.b
the definition of event, see 
38 CFR 3.159(a)(4), and 
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.g, and
the reasonable doubt rule, see
38 CFR 4.3
38 CFR 3.102, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.j.

V.ii.2.A.1.b.  Satisfying the Current Disability Requirement for SC

Evidence of a current disability is required as one of the components of establishing SC.  Generally, this criterion is satisfied when a current examination or other evidence demonstrates the presence of a chronic disability.  However, the evidence must be reviewed to determine whether a disability was present at the time the claim was filed or during the pendency of the claim but has since resolved.
The requirement for a current disability is met if a disability exists when a Veteran files a claim or while the claim is pending, even though the disability resolves before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) decides the claim.
A diagnosis that is near-contemporaneous with the filing of a claim must be considered when determining whether a disability existed when the claim was received and/or during its pendency. 
A near-contemporaneous diagnosis is a diagnosis that is dated approximately within one year prior to the date of the claim being submitted.
A diagnosis that predates, but is near-contemporaneous with, a claim is capable of establishing a current disability under the law. 
A determination of SC will be made on a case-by-case basis with evaluation of all pertinent evidence.  Consider the history of the diagnosis and give appropriate weight to any diagnosis present near-contemporaneously with or during the pendency of a claim.  The weighing of evidence will generally result in one of the following three possible conclusions:
The contemporaneous or near-contemporaneous evidence at or near the time of the claim shows a clear diagnosis.  The current medical evidence (often the compensation examination) shows the disability has resolved and no current diagnosis is warranted.  A grant of benefits is in order, generally with a staged disability evaluation.
The contemporaneous or near-contemporaneous evidence at or near the time of the claim suggests or reflects a treating or unconfirmed diagnosis but does not clearly establish whether a confirmed diagnosis was present.  The current medical evidence (often the compensation examination) indicates no diagnosis is currently warranted.  The evidence presently of record does not clearly establish whether the prior diagnosis was or was not warranted.  A medical opinion is necessary to reconcile the status of the prior diagnosis.
The contemporaneous or near-contemporaneous evidence at or near the time of the claim shows a diagnosis.  The current medical evidence (often the compensation examination) shows a clear finding that the prior diagnosis was in error and includes adequate rationale.  A denial of SC is warranted, assuming that other medical evidence does not refute the current medical opinion.  
Example 1:  A Veteran is diagnosed with eczema regularly throughout service and was treated with topical medications by dermatologists on multiple occasions.  Symptoms waxed and waned, as is typical with eczema, based on seasonal changes.  Service treatment records (STRs) from June 2012 show eczema.  A Benefits Delivery at Discharge claim is submitted, and a VA pre-discharge examination from August 2012 determines that no pathology exists to render a diagnosis of a skin disorder.  The in-service records clearly show a long-standing diagnosis of eczema which was present near-contemporaneously with the claim.  SC should be granted.
 
Example 2:  A Veteran claimed SC for sinusitis in March 2008, prior to military discharge in July 2008.  During service, the Veteran was treated variably for upper respiratory infections, ear infections, deviated septum due to an in-service injury, chronic nasal congestion, and sinus problems.  On examination, the Veteran reported pain and headache in the sinus area and non-incapacitating flare-ups two to three times a year.  The examiner provided no diagnosis and indicated that no sinusitis was shown on exam.  The examiner indicated that there was no visible postnasal drainage or significant hypertrophy or posterior oropharyngeal lymphoid tissue.  The examiner explained that the layman concept of sinusitis or sinus problems is understandable, but in the truest sense, from a specialist’s point of view, there is no underlying chronic sinusitis in this case, especially based on the computed tomography (CT) scans.  The examiner indicated that the in-service symptoms were consistent with acute episodes of upper respiratory infection and/or symptoms of deviated nasal septum.  The evidence of record is sufficient to establish SC for traumatic deviated nasal septum.  There is no medical evidence to refute the examiner’s finding that sinusitis is not shown by the medical evidence of record.  SC for sinusitis should be denied.
References:  For more information on
current disability, see
McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App 319 (2007), and
Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet.App 289 (2013)
evaluating medical evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.3, and
reviewing for evidence of current disability to determine whether VA examination or opinion is warranted, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.a.

V.ii.2.A.1.c.  Establishing Direct SC Under 38 CFR 3.303(a)

Direct SC may be established under 38 CFR 3.303(a) when
the evidence or a medical opinion shows a nexus between a current disability and an injury, disease, or event in service, or
competent medical evidence demonstrates continuous symptoms that are sufficient to constitute a nexus between a current disability and an injury, disease, or event in service.
Notes:
For any disability shown to be chronic in a medical sense, but not listed in 38 CFR 3.309(a), continuous symptoms may be used to satisfy the nexus element for direct SC under 38 CFR 3.303(a).  When the nexus element is met, a medical opinion is not needed.
Continuous symptoms are demonstrated when the medical evidence shows symptoms continuing without stopping, or recurring regularly, with minimal interruptions, from military service. 
When the evidence shows isolated instances of symptoms which do not demonstrate continuous symptomatology since service, an examination with medical opinion requested in accordance with 38 CFR 3.159(c)(4)may provide the required nexus.
References:  For more information on 
reviewing evidence before determining an examination is necessary, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A.1.c
using medical evidence in lieu of examination, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.a, and
the definition of competent medical evidence, see
38 CFR 3.159(a)(1), and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.d.

V.ii.2.A.1.d.  Establishing the Nexus for Direct SC Under 38 CFR 3.303(b)

The principles of chronicity and continuity discussed under 38 CFR 3.303(b) may be used to satisfy the nexus element for direct SC when the claimed disability is a chronic disease listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a). 
Important:  If the nexus element is satisfied under 38 CFR 3.303(b) based on chronicity or continuity as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.a.1.e and f, then a medical opinion is not needed to establish SC.
References:  For more information on
reviewing evidence before determining an examination is necessary, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A.1.c, and
using medical evidence in lieu of examination, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.a.

V.ii.2.A.1.e.Establishing Direct SC Based on Chronicity

When a chronic disease listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a) is shown in service, consider all subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease as service-connected (SC), unless there are intercurrent causes to explain post-service manifestations of the chronic disease.  To establish SC under 38 CFR 3.303(b) based on the chronicity of a disease shown in service, the evidence must include
manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and
evidence sufficient to establish the presence of chronic disability in service as opposed to isolated findings or a diagnosis merely including the word "chronic."
Example:  Right knee degenerative joint disease (arthritis) first began and was diagnosed during active duty service and was confirmed by x-ray imaging.  The Veteran claims SC for right knee arthritis 10 years after separation.  Medical records dated since separation from service are silent for right knee complaints or treatment, and there is no evidence of post-service right knee injury.
Analysis:  Right knee degenerative joint disease is a chronic disability listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a).  The in-service evidence of arthritis diagnosed by x-ray establishes onset and chronicity of the claimed condition.  There is no evidence of an intercurrent cause for the right knee arthritis. 
Result:  The clear onset of a chronic disability in service satisfies the nexus element for direct SC, and SC can be established under 38 CFR 3.303(b) without a medical opinion.  
Notes: 
When the finding of chronicity is in question, evidence of continuity is required to establish SC for conditions listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a).
A careful review of the evidence may reveal that chronic disability from a condition had its onset during active duty service and has chronically persisted from active service to the present, even when service medical providers did not conclude that there were residuals or continuation of a disease or injury.
For any disability not listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a), SC must be established under 38 CFR 3.303(a) by associating a current disability to service by a nexus consisting of evidence of continuous symptoms or a medical opinion.
Reference:  For more information on chronicity, see 
38 CFR 3.303(b), and
Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed.Cir. 2013).

V.ii.2.A.1.f.  Establishing SC Based on Continuity of Symptoms

Continuity of symptomatology satisfies the nexus element of direct SC under 38 CFR 3.303(b), and serves as the evidentiary tool to confirm the existence of the chronic disease while in service.  Continuity of symptomatology under 38 CFR 3.303(b) may only be used to establish SC for a chronic disease listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a).  A showing of continuity for a chronic disability listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a) is only required when
the condition noted during service is not, in fact, shown to be chronic, or
where chronicity may be legitimately questioned.
Reference:  For more information on continuity of symptoms, see
38 CFR 3.303(b), and
Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed.Cir. 2013).

V.ii.2.A.1.g.  Establishing Direct SC Under 38 CFR 3.303(d)

Consider whether direct SC may be established under 38 CFR 3.303(d), even if SC is claimed for a disease diagnosed after discharge from service.  SC may be awarded for a disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.

V.ii.2.A.1.h.  Definition:  Acute and Transitory

An acute disability is a disease or injury that
has definite symptoms
is short in duration, and
results in a recovery without apparent residuals.
A transitory disability is a disease or injury that is not permanent.
Examples:  Acute and transitory disabilities include
nasopharyngitis or catarrhal fever (common cold)
pneumonia, or
a bruise.
Important:  Do not arbitrarily determine in-service injuries to be acute and transitory without relying on competent medical evidence determining that chronic disability was not demonstrated.
References:  For more information on 
the need for medical evidence in acute and transitory determinations, see McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 79 (2006), and
the definition of competent medical evidence, see
38 CFR 3.159(a)(1), and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.d.

 2.  Presumption of Soundness and Active Service Requirements
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on determining direct SC, including
definition of presumption of soundness
service requirements for presumption of soundness
considering the presumption of soundness at entry into service
definition of active continuous service
applying the presumption of soundness for active duty for training (ADT), and
requirements for inactive duty training (IADT) to be considered active service.

Change Date

August 2, 2022

V.ii.2.A.2.a.  Definition: Presumption of Soundness

The presumption of soundness means that a Veteran will be considered to have been in sound condition (the claimed disability did not exist) when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service.
Exceptions:  The presumption of soundness does not apply when the evidence shows
defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at entrance into service (such as conditions noted on the entrance examination), or
the injury or disease clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service and was not aggravated by service.
Notes: 
The presumption of soundness applies only when the Veteran underwent a physical examination at the time of entry into service on which the claim is based. 
Only the conditions that are recorded in the enlistment examination report are to be considered as noted.  A history of pre-service conditions recorded at the time of the entrance examination is not a notation of the condition.  It is just one factor that must be considered on the question of presumption of soundness. 
The presumption of soundness is also applicable when the Veteran underwent a physical examination upon entrance into service, but the report of examination is unavailable.  In such a situation, the presumption of soundness will stand.  Once the presumption of soundness arises it is only overcome when the record contains clear and unmistakable evidence showing that the disease or injury existed prior to service and was not aggravated by service.
A defect, infirmity, or disorder noted on the enlistment examination must meet established criteria and/or definitions of disability to overcome the presumption of soundness.  For example, audiometric data documenting the existence of abnormal hearing but not to the extent satisfactory to meet the definition of hearing loss for VA purposes as specified in 38 CFR 3.385 would not overcome the presumption of soundness.  To establish that there was a hearing loss existent at enlistment, the audiometric data must document hearing loss for VA purposes as defined in 38 CFR 3.385.
Reference:  For more information on the presumption of soundness and aggravation, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.C
38 CFR 3.304(b)
38 U.S.C. 1111
VAOPGCPREC 3-2003
Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed.Cir. 2004)
Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 231 (2012)
Gilbert v. Shinseki, 26 Vet.App. 48 (2012), and
McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 15 (2016).

V.ii.2.A.2.b.  Service Requirements for Presumption of Soundness

Use the table below to determine the service requirements the Veteran must meet before VA can apply the presumption of soundness.
If the Veteran served during …
Then the Veteran must …
peacetime before January 1, 1947
have had active continuous service of six months or more, per 38 CFR 3.305(b).
peacetime on or after January 1, 1947, or
wartime
meet no minimum service requirements, per 38 CFR 3.304(b).


V.ii.2.A.2.c.  Considering the Presumption of Soundness at Entry Into Service

Under 38 U.S.C. 1111, when no pre-existing condition is noted at entrance into service, then the presumption of soundness establishes that the claimed disability did not exist before service unless there is clear and unmistakable (undebatable) evidence showing that the disease or injury which manifested in service
existed prior to service, and
was not aggravated by service.
Notes: 
Personality disorders are not considered diseases or injuries under 38 U.S.C. 1110; therefore presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. 1111pertaining to personality disorders does not apply.
The presumption of soundness still requires evidence of a nexus between a current disability and the in-service disease or injury. 

V.ii.2.A.2.d.  Definition: Active Continuous Service

Active continuous service may exclude lengthy periods of extended absence from duty, such as unauthorized absence or other extended non-pay status.
A determination of whether a period of unauthorized absence is considered a break in service should be undertaken on a case-by-case basis with consideration of the facts of the individual’s case, including the extent to which the circumstances, nature, and duration of the claimant’s absence affected his or her performance of continuous duty. 
Examples:  The following facts and findings are set forth in General Counsel (GC) Opinions:
In GC Advisory Opinion Op. G.C. 4-80, the service member was absent from duty for 1,344 days before returning to military control.  The Veteran received an honorable discharge nine days later and developed a chronic disease within one year of discharge.  Since the Veteran was without active, continuous service for all but nine days of the 3-3/4 years preceding separation, the continuous service requirement of 38 CFR 3.307 was not met. 
In Precedent Opinion VAOPGCPREC 11-1993, the service member voluntarily returned to his unit after 13 days of unauthorized absence.  Although the 13 days of unauthorized absence was not creditable for pay or time-in-service purposes, it did not constitute a break in service for purpose of the “active, continuous service” requirement under 38 CFR 3.307.

V.ii.2.A.2.e.  Applying the Presumption of Soundness for ADT

In claims based on a period of active duty for training (ADT), apply the presumption of soundness only when the Veteran underwent a physical examination at the time of entry into the period of ADT on which the claim is based. 
If an examination was performed, consider the Veteran to have been in sound condition when entering ADT except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted on the examination report.
Important:  The presumption of soundness is only triggered for a period of ADT when an examination has been conducted if the claimant has previously established Veteran status, which is defined as having prior active military service, and was discharged under conditions other than dishonorable.  Neither the presumption of soundness nor aggravation may be applied if the claimant does not have Veteran status.
 
Reference:  For more information on the presumption of soundness in claims based on ADT, see Smith (Valerie Y.) v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 40, 44 (2010).

V.ii.2.A.2.f.Requirements for IADT to Be Considered Active Service

Inactive duty training (IADT) is not considered active service unless SC is awarded for disability or death resulting from
an injury directly incurred during the period of inactive duty training, or
an injury or one of the following events if the injury or event occurred during inactive duty training or while an individual was proceeding directly to, or returning directly from, a period of such training
an acute myocardial infarction
a cardiac arrest, or
a cerebrovascular accident.
Notes: 
If evidence establishes that an individual suffers from a disabling condition as a result of the administration of an anthrax or Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine during IADT, the individual may be considered disabled by an “injury” incurred during such training.
An individual who suffers from posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a result of military sexual trauma (MST) that occurred during a period of IADT may be considered disabled by an injury for purposes of 38 U.S.C. 101(2) and (24).
References:  For more information on
determining duty periods, see 38 CFR 3.6
injuries that occurred
while an individual was proceeding directly to, or returning directly from, a period of IADT, see 38 CFR 3.6(e), and
as a result of administration of an anthrax vaccine during inactive duty training, see VAOPGCPREC 4-2002
considering claims for SC for COVID-19, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 3.6, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 10, and
PTSD that results from MST during IADT, see VAOPGCPREC 8-2001.  

 
3.  Determining Service Incurrence of an Injury
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on determining service incurrence of an injury, including
substantiating the circumstances of injuries
evaluating evidence of scars
processing examination reports of scars
considering evidence for combat-related disabilities, and
definition of satisfactory evidence.

Change Date

January 20, 2016

V.ii.2.A.3.a.  Substantiating the Circumstances of Injuries

The development activity and/or rating activity must review the evidence of record, to include personnel records and STRs, to ensure the injury occurred during service and in the line of duty (LOD).
Rationale:  The results of injuries, including gunshot wounds acquired before or after service, are frequently encountered and would not be granted SC as they are not injuries that occurred during service or in the LOD.
Reference:  For more information on willful misconduct and LOD determinations, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.C.

V.ii.2.A.3.b.  Evaluating Evidence of Scars

When evaluating evidence of scars, keep in mind that a claimant may have
been accepted into service with a notation of one or more scars existing at the time of entrance
sustained a wound, with a resulting scar, during service, or
received an injury following separation from service resulting in a scar that would be present at subsequent physical examinations.
Because the Veteran could have incurred a scar before or after service, exercise caution in characterizing a scar as the residual of a wound or injury incurred in service. 
 
If there is any doubt as to whether the scar is a residual of a wound or injury incurred in service, simply describe the scar, without ascribing it to a specific injury such as a “gunshot wound” or “shrapnel wound.”

V.ii.2.A.3.c.  Processing Examination Reports of Scars

If the presence of a scar or scars is recorded in a physical examination report related to a claim for scarring, review official records to ensure the scar or scars are in fact a residual of wounds in service.
 
If there is reasonable doubt as to whether the scar(s) are related to service, that is, an approximate balance of evidence for and against the claim, award SC for the claimed scar(s). 
 
References:  For more information on 
the definition and application of reasonable doubt, see 38 CFR 3.102, and
considering SC for scars as within scope of the claimed issue, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c.

V.ii.2.A.3.d.  Considering Evidence for Combat-Related Disabilities

Accept satisfactory lay or other evidence that an injury or disease was incurred or aggravated in combat if the evidence is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service even though there is no official record of such incurrence or aggravation.
 
In order for evidence submitted by the Veteran to support a factual presumption that the claimed disease or injury was incurred or aggravated in service, the evidence must
be satisfactory when considered alone
be consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service, and
not be refuted by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
Notes:  
38 CFR 3.304(d) is derived from 38 U.S.C. 1154(b), and lightens the evidentiary burden with respect to disabilities alleged to be the result of combat service.
Even when an event or injury in service is established under the cited combat provisions, for SC to be established there must still be evidence of a current disability and a nexus between the current disability and the combat event or injury in service.
References:  For more information on 
a definition of engaging in combat with the enemy, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.A.3.e
utilizing individual decorations as evidence of combat participation, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.A.3.h
determining whether a Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy for the purposes of determining SC under 38 U.S.C. 1154(b), see VAOPGCPREC 12-1999, and
satisfactory proof of combat-related disability, see
38 CFR 3.304(d)
38 U.S.C. 1154(b)
Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 508 (1995), and
Collette v. Brown, 82F.3d.389 (Fed.Cir. 1996).

V.ii.2.A.3.e.  Definition:Satisfactory Evidence

Satisfactory evidence generally means evidence that is credible.
 
It is proper to
consider internal consistency and plausibility in determining whether evidence is credible, and
regard statements that contradict other evidence of record as unsatisfactory.
Reference:  For more information on determining whether evidence is credible, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.b, and
Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 508 (1995).
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 2, Section B - Presumptive Service Connection (SC)
Article ID: 554400000180482
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview
 

In This Section

This section contains the topic “Determining Presumptive SC.”

 
 1.  Determining Presumptive SC
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on determining presumptive SC, including
overview of presumptive SC
considering presumptive SC 
for metastatic cancer, and
under historical rating criteria
burden of proof required to rebut presumptive SC
example of
sufficient evidence to rebut presumptive SC, and
insufficient evidence to rebut presumptive SC, and
establishing onset during a required manifestation period.

Change Date

December 21, 2023

V.ii.2.B.1.a.  Overview of Presumptive SC

Diseases or conditions subject to presumptive service connection (SC) will be considered to have been incurred in or aggravated by service if manifested to a compensable level, when required by the corresponding regulation or statute, within the time frame specified for that certain disease under the regulation or statute, even if there is no evidence of such disease during service. 
Type of Disease or Condition
Reference for Presumption of SC
chronic disease
38 CFR 3.309(a)
diseases associated with service of the following categories
tropical
former prisoner of war
exposure to radiation
exposure to certain herbicide agents, or 
exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune
38 CFR 3.309(b)-(f)
diseases associated with exposure to ionizing radiation
38 CFR 3.311
diseases based on full-body exposure to mustard gas or Lewisite
38 CFR 3.316
diseases associated with service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations including
undiagnosed illnesses
medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses, and
certain infectious diseases
38 CFR 3.317
diseases associated with service in Afghanistan
38 CFR 3.317(c)(2)
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with at least 90 days of continuous active service
38 CFR 3.318
coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
38 U.S.C. 1164
diseases associated with exposure to fine particulate matter
38 CFR 3.320
References:  For more information on
principles related to presumptive SC, see 38 CFR 3.307
diseases subject to presumptive SC, see 38 CFR 3.309
presumptive SC for other organic diseases of the nervous system under 38 CFR 3.309(a), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.1.d
considering tinnitus as an organic disease of the nervous system, see
Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 258 (2015), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.a
considering claims for presumptive SC based on periods of active duty for training or inactive duty for training, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.A.2.i.

V.ii.2.B.1.b.  Considering Presumptive SC for Metastatic Cancer

SC on a presumptive basis for cancer associated with an in-service exposure event may only be established if the cancer in consideration is the primary or originating site of the cancer.  Consider the factors below in determining whether a cancer is primary or metastatic and whether SC may be established. 
Most pathology reports will indicate if the cancer is primary or metastatic.
The diagnosis of cancer in one part of the body, following a diagnosis of cancer in a different part of the body, does not necessarily mean that the cancer diagnosed first has metastasized.  It is possible to have primary cancers in separate areas of the body.
If SC is established for a primary cancer that metastasizes into a separate body system, then SC on a secondary basis should be established for the metastasized cancer in the separate body system. 
Example:  A Veteran claims SC for lung cancer associated with herbicide exposure.  Pathology reports indicate that the Veteran’s liver cancer metastasized to the lung.  Since liver cancer is not a disability presumptively associated with herbicide exposure, SC for the metastatic lung cancer as due to herbicide exposure is not warranted.
Reference:  For more information on assigning disability evaluations for cancer, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.5.a and b.

V.ii.2.B.1.c.  Considering Presumptive SC Under Historical Rating Criteria 

Determine whether presumptive SC is warranted by applying the criteria from the version of the rating schedule in effect during the applicable presumptive period.
 
Example:  A Veteran claims SC for hyperthyroidism on March 22, 2019.  The Veteran was released from active service on September 14, 2015.  Medical evidence shows that in December 2015, the Veteran was diagnosed with hyperthyroidism.  Under the historical rating criteria in effect prior to December 10, 2017, the hyperthyroidism has not been compensable at any point.  Under the current rating criteria, the hyperthyroidism is compensable. 
 
Since the hyperthyroidism was not manifest to a compensable degree in accordance with the historical rating criteria that were in effect in 2015 during the one-year presumptive period following release from active service, presumptive SC is not warranted. 

V.ii.2.B.1.d.  Burden of Proof Required to Rebut Presumptive SC 

Presumptive SC can be rebutted under 38 CFR 3.307(d).  The medical evidence to rebut the presumption of SC need not be conclusive, but must
include
affirmative evidence of an intercurrent cause, and
sound medical reasoning, and
be based on consideration of all evidence of record.
The presumption of SC may not be rebutted using an opinion that
does not consider
the entire record, and/or
relevant evidence that post-dates the opinion
has a negative finding of causation with respect to in-service exposure by itself (unaccompanied by medical evidence and sound medical reasoning to support the opinion)
identifies an intercurrent cause but does not
establish that the intercurrent cause is the sole cause of the disease, to the exclusion of in-service exposure as a contributory cause, or
explain why a potentially intercurrent cause makes the presumptive cause of the disability medically unlikely, or
relies on the “preponderance of the evidence” to rebut the presumption, as this level of proof is not sufficient to establish affirmative evidence contrary to the presumption.
Note:  As discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.E.1.c, genetic test results showing a predisposition to disease are not sufficient to rebut the evidentiary presumption of SC or to sever SC that has already been granted.
References:  For more information on
rebuttal of presumptive SC, see
38 U.S.C. 1113
38 CFR 3.307(d)
Darby v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 243 (1997)
Taylor v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 158 (2014), and
Goodsell v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 36 (1993)
principles of reviewing evidence and decision making, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A, and
handling pre-regulation Camp Lejeune subject matter expert review opinions pertaining to rebuttal of presumptive SC, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 8.B.1.e. 

V.ii.2.B.1.e.  Example of Sufficient Evidence to Rebut Presumptive SC

Situation:  A Veteran with Vietnam service claims SC for lung cancer.  Medical opinion indicates that the lung cancer was metastasized from original stomach cancer.  The opinion is supported by and cites medical evidence indicating the lung cancer originated in the stomach and was not the result of in-service exposures. 
Result:  The decision maker determines the evidence is sufficient to rebut the presumption of SC under 38 CFR 3.307.  In arriving at this conclusion, the decision maker finds that the opinion sufficiently and affirmatively identifies an intercurrent cause of the Veteran’s disease, in this case stomach cancer, and also provides a specific negative finding of causation with respect to in service exposures.   

V.ii.2.B.1.f.    Example of Insufficient Evidence to Rebut Presumptive SC

Situation:  A Veteran with service in the Korean demilitarized zone during 1968 and 1969 (sufficient to establish exposure to herbicides) claims SC for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL).  Medical evidence shows that the Veteran was previously diagnosed with hepatitis B and C.  A bone marrow biopsy was evaluated as suspicious for hepatitis C-related B-cell lymphoma.  Diagnoses of hepatitis C-related B cell lymphoma and Non-Hodgkin’s B cell lymphoma secondary to hepatitis C are shown in the record. 
 
An oncologist opined that the absence of past studies would make determination of the etiology of the disorder impossible but that it was his belief that the evidence suggests that the hepatitis C infection led to the development of the lymphoma.  The oncologist supported the conclusion with citation to medical literature linking hepatitis C and NHL and noted that the appellant’s lymphoma did not manifest until after the diagnosis of hepatitis C.  The oncologist did, however, note that the risk of developing the tumor is greater in those with exposure to Agent Orange, even for those with a normal immune system. 
 
Result:  The decision maker finds that the evidence currently of record is insufficient to rebut the presumption of SC under 38 CFR 3.307.  In arriving at this finding, the decision maker determines that although a negative opinion is present, the additional factors required to rebut the presumption of SC are not present.  The negative opinion is based on the entire record.  However, the evidence does not affirmatively establish that an intercurrent cause is present because the opinion concedes that the in-service exposure is a risk factor for developing NHL and that no testing was done to definitively determine the etiology of the disorder.  Consequently, the opinion does not show that the hepatitis C was the sole cause of the condition nor rule out the exposure as a risk factor or contributory cause.  Additionally, the opinion relies on an incorrect evidentiary standard since the examiner has only opined that the evidence suggests another causation, which does not provide affirmative evidence contrary to the presumption. 

V.ii.2.B.1.g.  Establishing Onset During a Required Manifestation Period

Certain presumptive disabilities require onset during a specified time period following specific exposures or military service.  This is known as the manifestation period.  Claims processors must consider all relevant lay and medical evidence to establish onset of a presumptive disability during an applicable manifestation period, and when appropriate, obtain a medical opinion confirming a related diagnosis. 
 
Note:  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when
a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition
the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or
lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.
Example:  A Veteran claims SC for chloracne, which under 38 CFR 3.307 has a manifestation period of one year after the last date of herbicide exposure.  Exposure to herbicides is established as the evidence shows the Veteran served in Vietnam until June 1972.  With his claim, the Veteran submitted a lay statement that he has had skin rashes since returning from Vietnam in 1972.
 
Result:  A Veteran is competent to describe the presence of a skin rash or other similar symptoms capable of observation without having a medical background.  A Veteran is also competent to describe current symptoms of a disability and describe the date of onset.  Consequently, a medical opinion should be requested to determine if the Veteran has a current diagnosis of chloracne that can be linked to the lay testimony reporting symptoms within the required manifestation period.
 
Reference:  For more information on
considering lay evidence, see
Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007)
Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.B, and
threshold for examinations in presumptive SC claims, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.f. 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 2, Section C - In-Service Aggravation of a Pre-Service Disability
Article ID: 554400000180483
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview
 

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Applicability of the Presumption of Soundness in Aggravation Determinations Under 38 CFR 3.306
2
Presumption of Aggravation
3
Special Procedures for Aggravation Determinations Under 38 CFR 3.306


 
1.  Applicability of the Presumption of Soundness in Aggravation Determinations Under 38 CFR 3.306
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on applying the presumption of soundness when determining whether in-service aggravation of a pre-service disability has occurred, including
considering aggravation with the presumption of soundness at entry into service
evidence establishing pre-existence when there is a presumption of soundness
role of medical evaluation board (MEB) and physical evaluation board (PEB) findings, and
considering lay evidence and the presumption of soundness.

Change Date

September 11, 2024

V.ii.2.C.1.a.  Considering Aggravation With the Presumption of Soundness at Entry Into Service

Proper analysis of the evidence for presumption of soundness is very important to making a determination of aggravation.  Carefully analyze the evidence for aggravation of a claimed disability when
under 38 U.S.C. 1153, a condition for which the Veteran is seeking service connection (SC) was noted at entry, or
under 38 U.S.C. 1111, a condition for which the Veteran is seeking SC was not noted at entry but evidence proves that the condition pre-existed service.
Reference:  For more information on the presumption of soundness, see
38 CFR 3.304(b)
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.2
38 U.S.C. 1111
Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089 (Fed.Cir. 2004)
Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 231 (2012)
Gilbert v. Shinseki, 26 Vet.App. 48 (2012), and
Morris v. Shinseki, 678 F.3d 1346 (Fed.Cir. 2012). 

V.ii.2.C.1.b. Evidence Establishing Pre-Existence When There Is a Presumption of Soundness

When a claimed disorder was not noted on the entrance examination and the presumption of soundness applies, only evidence showing the disorder clearly and unmistakably existed prior to enlistment may establish pre-existence of the claimed condition.
 
Any acceptable evidence pertinent to onset or inception of the condition should be evaluated carefully.  Determine credibility and appropriate weight of evidence which may include
medical records from before, during, or after service, and
lay evidence such as history from the claimant.
Important:  38 CFR 3.304(b)(1), and 38 CFR 3.304(b)(2) emphasize that, in conducting the analysis, the decision maker should not rely on a speculative medical conclusion.  There should be a complete medical analysis taking into consideration history, data, and generally-accepted medical principles including knowledge about the nature and course of the disorder at issue.  The decision maker, in turn, must conduct a critical analysis of the evidence. 
 
References:  For more information on
evaluating evidence (including credibility and weight of evidence), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A, and
rebutting the presumption of soundness, see
38 CFR 3.304(b)(1), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.

V.ii.2.C.1.c.  The Role of MEB and PEB Findings

The rating activity must afford Medical Evaluation Board (MEB) and Physical Evaluation Board (PEB) reports due weight when considering the evidence of record regarding a condition which may have pre-existed service.
 
Important:  Do not deny a claim based solely upon the conclusion of an MEB or PEB report that a condition pre-existed service and was not aggravated by service if the report does not also contain a supporting analysis or medical explanation for the conclusion.  The MEB or PEB report alone is not sufficient to constitute clear and unmistakable evidence to rebut the presumption of soundness without a supporting analysis or medical explanation.
 
Reference:  For more information on the role of MEB and PEB findings, see Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 231 (2012). 

V.ii.2.C.1.d.  Considering Lay Evidence and the Presumption of Soundness

Although contemporaneous pre-service clinical evidence or recorded history may satisfy the burden of evidence clearly and unmistakably showing pre-existence of a claimed condition when the same condition was not noted on entry into service, there is no absolute requirement that such evidence be present before the presumption of soundness can be rebutted.  A later medical opinion based on statements made by the Veteran about pre-service history of the disorder may rebut the presumption by providing evidence which clearly and unmistakably establishes the claimed condition existed prior to service.  However, where there is such a medical opinion, and other evidence on the question, all of the probative evidence must be considered and weighed to determine whether evidence clearly and unmistakably establishes the condition preexisted service.
 
38 CFR 3.304(b)(3) provides that signed statements made by the Veteran during service about the onset or incurrence of disease which are against the claimant’s interest cannot be used if there is no other evidence establishing pre-existence of the claimed condition.  In such a case, the other evidence will be considered as though the Veteran’s statement against their own interest did not exist.  However, the courts have held that other voluntary admissions of a pre-service disability or condition can be considered with appropriate application of weight and credibility assigned as described in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A. 
 
Reference:  For more information on lay evidence and the presumption of soundness, see Harris v. West, 203 F.3d 1347 (Fed.Cir. 2000).

 2.  Presumption of Aggravation
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on the presumption of aggravation, including
aggravation determinations when there is a presumption of soundness
applying the presumption of aggravation to claims based on
active service, and
active duty for training (ADT) and inactive duty for training (IADT)
distinguishing between presumption of soundness and presumption of aggravation
considering flare-ups of pre-existing injury or disease
considering the usual effects of medical or surgical treatment
presumption of aggravation for chronic diseases
aggravation of pre-existing disability under combat conditions, and
presumption of aggravation under combat conditions.

Change Date

September 11, 2024

V.ii.2.C.2.a.Aggravation Determinations When There Is a Presumption of Soundness

In determining that the presumption of soundness has been overcome, 38 U.S.C. 1111 requires that the evidence clearly and unmistakably establishes that the disability
existed prior to service, and
was not aggravated by service.  
When a claimed disorder was not noted on the entrance examination and the presumption of soundness applies, but evidence shows pre-existence of the claimed disability, the presumption of soundness still applies unless clear and unmistakable evidence further proves the condition was not aggravated by service.  Such clear and unmistakable evidence must establish that
there was no increase in disability during service, or
any increase in disability was due to the natural progression of the pre-existing condition.
Consider the entire evidentiary record when making the determination as to whether there was an increase in disability in service.  The record may or may not include evidence showing
an identified injury or other event in service, or
pre-service and/or post-service treatment.
Important:  Avoid making unsupported conclusions that the evidentiary standard is not met based on the fact that the service records do not show a specific injury or causative event or that there are no post-service treatment records. 
These facts may be irrelevant.  The relevance depends on medical evidence of the nature and expected course of the disability at issue.
Drawing an unsupported conclusion based on lack of post-service treatment records or service records not showing a specific injury or causative event impermissibly shifts the burden of proof onto the Veteran to prove aggravation.
References:  For more information on
presumption of soundness, see 38 U.S.C. 1111
presumption of aggravation, see 38 U.S.C. 1153
distinguishing between presumption of soundness and presumption of aggravation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.C.2.d
establishing lack of aggravation when the presumption of soundness applies, see Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 231 (2012), and
evaluating and weighing evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.

V.ii.2.C.2.b.  Applying the Presumption of Aggravation to Claims Based on Active Service 

Under 38 U.S.C. 1153 and 38 CFR 3.306, when there is a claim for SC for aggravation of a disability during active service, and a pre-service injury or disease was noted on enlistment, the claimant initially bears the burden of proving that the pre-existing condition worsened in service.  
When an increase in disability is proven, the presumption of aggravation applies.  The presumption of aggravation requires the decision maker to consider a pre-existing injury or disease to have been aggravated by active military service when there is an increase in disability during active military service, unless the evidence clearly and unmistakably shows the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the injury or disease. 
 
Notes: 
Always address the issue of aggravation when SC for a pre-existing disability is claimed.
If SC is not established, include an explanation of the relevant findings from the medical records before, during, and after service that demonstrate the condition existed prior to service and did not increase in severity or that the increase in severity was due to natural progression in the Narrative of the rating decision.
Ensure that determinations are based on independent medical evidence and not on speculation. 
References:  For more information on
determining whether the criteria for examination have been met in claims based on preservice aggravation, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.e
the presumption of aggravation and the standard for rebutting the presumption, see
38 U.S.C. 1153, and
Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 231 (2012)
considering the absence of evidence, or negative evidence, to rebut the presumption of aggravation, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.C.2.i
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.g, and
Maxson v. West, 12 Vet.App. 453, aff’d sub nom Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed.Cir. 2000), and
evaluating disabilities aggravated by service, see
38 CFR 3.322(a), and
38 CFR 4.22.

V.ii.2.C.2.c.  Applying the Presumption of Aggravation to Claims Based on ADT and IADT 

In claims based on active duty for training (ADT) or inactive duty for training (IADT), direct evidence demonstrating the pre-existing disability permanently worsened during ADT or IADT and the worsening was not the result of natural progression of the disability is required to establish aggravation (see Smith (Valerie Y.) v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 40, 44 (2010)).
The presumption of aggravation does not routinely apply when the claim is based on ADT or IADT.  However, if Veteran status and active service is established for a period of ADT or IADT on the basis of a grant of SC for one or more disabilities as specified in 38 CFR 3.6(a), the presumption of aggravation does apply for other preexisting disabilities claimed to have been aggravated during the same period of ADT or IADT if 
the claimant underwent an entrance examination prior to the period of ADT or IADT, or
other contemporaneous evidence establishes the baseline severity of the preexisting condition. 
Example:  A Veteran establishes SC for a lumbar spine disability that was directly incurred during a period of ADT and subsequently claims SC for a shoulder condition on the basis that it was aggravated during the same period of ADT.  Because Veteran status has been established for the back disability, and the period of ADT is now considered active service per 38 CFR 3.6(a), the presumption of aggravation under 38 CFR 3.306 applies to the shoulder disability if the Veteran underwent an enlistment examination for this period of service or other contemporaneous evidence establishes the baseline severity of the preexisting condition.
 
References:  For more information on   
the presumption of aggravation and soundness for claims based on active duty for training, see 
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.A.2.h
Smith (Valerie Y.) v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 40 (2010), and 
Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 167 (2010), and
applying the presumption of aggravation when active service is established based on a period of ADT or IADT, see Hill v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 243 (2016).

V.ii.2.C.2.d.  Distinguishing Between Presumption of Soundness and Presumption of Aggravation

The presumption of soundness, under 38 U.S.C. 1111, and the presumption of aggravation, under 38 U.S.C. 1153, are different statutes with different burdens of proof.  The table below describes the fact patterns that must be applied to each respective statute.
Fact Pattern
Statute
Burden of Proof for Presumption
no evidence of disability upon entrance examination
presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. 1111
Presume soundness unlessthe evidence clearly and unmistakably shows
the disorder existed prior to service, and
was not aggravated by service.
evidence of disability upon entrance examination
presumption of aggravation under 38 U.S.C. 1153
If a review of the evidence reveals worsening of the condition in service, presume aggravation has occurred unless the evidence clearly and unmistakably shows the worsening of the condition was due to natural progression.  


V.ii.2.C.2.e.  Considering Flare-Ups of Pre-Existing Injury or Disease

Temporary or intermittent flare-ups of a pre-existing injury or disease are not sufficient to be considered aggravation in service unless the underlying condition, as contrasted to symptoms, has worsened.
 
Do not concede aggravation merely because a Veteran’s condition was in remission at the time of entry on active duty.
 
Reference:  For more information on the difference between increase in the underlying disability and temporary flare-ups of symptoms, see
38 CFR 3.306(b), and
Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 292 (1991). 

V.ii.2.C.2.f.  Considering the Usual Effects of Medical or Surgical Treatment

As required under 38 CFR 3.306(b)(1), unless a disease or injury that was incurred prior to service is otherwise aggravated by service, do not establish SC for the usual effects of medical or surgical treatment in service to correct or improve the condition, such as post-operative scars and/or absent or poorly functioning parts or organs.

V.ii.2.C.2.g.  Presumption of Aggravation for Chronic Diseases

In Splane v. West, 216 F.3d 1058 (Fed.Cir. 2000), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that 38 U.S.C. 1112(a) establishes a presumption of aggravation for chronic diseases that existed prior to service but first manifested to a degree of disability of 10 percent or more within the presumptive period after service.
 
Under 38 CFR 3.307, this presumption may be rebutted by affirmative evidence to the contrary or evidence to establish that such disability is due to an intercurrent disease or injury suffered after separation from service.

V.ii.2.C.2.h.  Aggravation of Pre-existing Disability Under Combat Conditions

38 U.S.C. 1154(b) provides that for combat Veterans, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) must accept satisfactory lay or other evidence of service aggravation despite the lack of official records if the lay or other evidence is consistent with the circumstances, conditions or hardships of the combat service. 
Unless there is clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, grant SC if there is
satisfactory evidence of aggravation consistent with the combat service
competent evidence of a nexus between the in-service aggravation and a current disability, and
evidence of current disability. 
38 CFR 3.306(b)(2) directs that due regard will be given to the places, types, and circumstances of service and particular consideration will be accorded to combat duty and other hardships of service.   
Important: 
A pre-existing disease or injury’s temporary or intermittent flare-up of symptoms does not trigger the presumption of aggravation unless there is an increase in the underlying disability.
However, 38 CFR 3.306(b)(2) provides that development of symptomatic manifestations of a preexisting injury or disease during or proximately following action with the enemy (or following status as a prisoner of war) will establish aggravation unless there is clear and convincing evidence of
no increase in the preexisting condition, or
the increase was the result of natural progression. 
References:  For more information on
aggravation of a pre-existing disability during combat conditions, see Jensen v. Brown, 19 F.3d 1413 (Fed.Cir. 1994), and
requirement of a nexus between current disability and injury or disease incurred or aggravated by combat service, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.3.d. 

V.ii.2.C.2.i.  Presumption of Aggravation Under Combat Conditions

Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed.Cir. 2000) held that VA, in deciding whether the presumption of aggravation of a condition during combat has been rebutted, must consider a Veteran’s entire medical history, to include any lengthy period without medical complaint during and after service.  VA must consider all relevant factors, to include
availability of medical records
nature and course of the disease or disability, and
amount of time that elapsed since military service. 
Important:  Do not merely dismiss the presence of disability because there is an absence of accompanying medical treatment records.  The absence of treatment records does not necessarily mean the absence of disability.  Moreover the absence of medical records during combat conditions does not necessarily establish the absence of disability.
Reference:  For more information on aggravation of a pre-existing disability during combat conditions, see
38 CFR 3.306(b)(2), and
Jensen v. Brown, 19 F.3d 1413 (Fed.Cir. 1994).

3.  Special Procedures for Aggravation Determinations Under 38 CFR 3.306
 

Introduction

This topic contains special procedures applicable to aggravation determinations under 38 CFR 3.306, including
records needed to determine baseline level of disability
evaluating disabilities service-connected (SC) by aggravation under 38 U.S.C. 1153, and
aggravation with a zero percent evaluation.

Change Date

September 15, 2021

V.ii.2.C.3.a.  Records Needed to Determine Baseline Level of Disability

The baseline for determining whether a pre-existing disability was aggravated by service is in all of a Veteran's medical records for that condition, not just those covering the period of enlistment and entry on active duty.

V.ii.2.C.3.b.  Evaluating Disabilities SC by Aggravation Under 38 U.S.C. 1153

The degree of disability evaluation existing at the time of entrance into active service must be considered when evaluating the disabilities connected to service on the basis of aggravation under 38 U.S.C. 1153. 
 
Use the table below to determine whether to deduct the degree of disability existing at entrance from the current disability evaluation.
 
If the disability evaluation existing at the time of entrance into active service ...
Then ...
is ascertainable
deduct the entrance disability evaluation from the present disability evaluation.
is not ascertainable.
do not deduct an entrance disability evaluation from the present disability evaluation.
Note:  Do not make a deduction if the disability has a total (100 percent) evaluation, as specified in 38 CFR 4.22.

V.ii.2.C.3.c.  Aggravation With a Zero Percent Evaluation 

Aggravation is established by any increase in severity, regardless of whether it would result in a schedular increased evaluation. 
 
Whenever there is competent and credible evidence of an increase in severity of the disability from the baseline, but the current and baseline disability would be assigned the same level of evaluation under 38 CFR Part 4, Schedule for Rating Disabilities, grant SC and assign a noncompensable evaluation. 
 
To justify SC, the degree of disability after aggravation does not have to be at least one level of evaluation higher than the baseline. 
 
Exception:  When the disability has a total (100 percent) evaluation, do not make a baseline deduction, as specified in 38 CFR 4.22.
 
Reference:  For more information on determining whether a disability has increased in severity under 38 U.S.C. 1153, see
Browder v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 204 (1991), and
Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 155 (1993).
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 2, Section D - Secondary Service Connection (SC) and Aggravation of Non-Service-Connected (NSC) Disabilities
Article ID: 554400000180484
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview
 

In This Section

This section contains the topic “Determining Secondary SC, Including by Aggravation.”

 
 
1.  Determining Secondary SC, Including by Aggravation
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on determining secondary SC, including by aggravation, including
provisions for SC under 38 CFR 3.310(a) and (b)
establishing causation for secondary SC
medical evidence required to show an NSC disability was aggravated by an SC disability
developing for medical evidence of baseline in NSC aggravation claims
information that must be included in the examiner’s report for secondary SC based on aggravation
determining the extent to which an NSC disability was aggravated by an SC disability, and
aggravation with a zero percent evaluation.

Change Date

August 6, 2019

V.ii.2.D.1.a.Provisions for SC Under 38 CFR 3.310(a) and (b)

Award service connection (SC) for the following under the provisions of 38 CFR 3.310(a) and 38 CFR 3.310(b).
disabilities that are proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected (SC) condition, or
the increase in severity of a non-service-connected (NSC) disability that is attributable to aggravation by an SC disability, and not to the natural progression of the NSC disability.
Note:  Permanent worsening of an NSC disability by an SC disability is notrequired to establish SC on the basis of aggravation under 38 CFR 3.310(b). 
References:  For more information on 
SC for aggravation of NSC disabilities by SC disabilities, see
38 CFR 3.310(b), and
Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 439 (1995), and
determinations about non-permanent worsening of an NSC disability in claims based on aggravation of an NSC disability by an SC disability, see Ward, Neal v. Wilkie (2019).

V.ii.2.D.1.b.  Establishing Causation for Secondary SC

SC on a secondary basis requires a showing of causation.  A showing of causation requires that the secondary disability be shown to be proximately due to, or the result of, an SC condition. 
 
To establish causation, the primary disability need not be SC, or even diagnosed, at the time the secondary condition is incurred.
 
Example:  SC was granted for a back disability with radiculopathy effective in 2015.  Credible evidence showed that the Veteran had a 20-year history of back pain and progressively worsening radiculopathy dating back to roughly 2001.  The formal diagnosis of radiculopathy was not made until 2010. 
 
The Veteran claimed SC for a shoulder disability in 2016, stating that his early symptoms of radiculopathy caused him to lose his balance, fall, and tear his rotator cuff in 2008.  He provided a medical opinion linking his rotator cuff tear to a fall, and the fall to sensory impairment and difficulty with proprioception due to early symptoms of radiculopathy. 
 
Result:  As the medical opinion establishes causation for the rotator cuff tear in the shoulder due to the radiculopathy, the requirements for SC on a secondary basis are satisfied. 
Although the radiculopathy was not formally diagnosed until after the fall, the credible evidence adequately establishes a history of back problems and gradual onset of radiculopathy dating back to 2001.  A finding of causation does not require that the primary disability be formally diagnosed at the time the secondary condition is incurred. 
Additionally, although SC had not been established for the back condition and radiculopathy at the time of the fall and subsequent rotator cuff tear, a finding of causation does not require that the primary disability be SC at the time the secondary condition was incurred. 
References:  For more information on the
establishment of causation prior to a finding of SC or formal diagnosis for the primary disability, see Frost v. Shulkin, Vet.App. 15-3102 (2017), and
effective date assigned when a claim for SC for a secondary disability precedes a claim for SC for the primary disability, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.3.f.

V.ii.2.D.1.c.  Medical Evidence Required to Show an NSC Disability Was Aggravated by an SC Disability

Do not concede an NSC disability is aggravated by an SC disability unless the baseline level of severity of the NSC disease or injury is established by
medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation, or
the earliest medical evidence created between the
onset of aggravation, and
receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of the NSC disability.

V.ii.2.D.1.d.  Developing for Medical Evidence of Baseline Disability in NSC Aggravation Claims

The responsibility for submitting evidence to establish a baseline level of disability for a claim for secondary SC based on aggravation of a NSC disability by an SC disability rests with the claimant.  
 
Medical evidence adequate to establish the baseline level of disability must show its level of severity
before aggravation by the SC disability, or
as soon as possible after aggravation, but before the date of receipt of the evidence establishing the current level of severity of the NSC disability.
Important:  General development for medical records, such as that included on a standard EZ application form or in automated Section 5103 notice, is sufficient to satisfy the duty to assist the claimant.  Establishment of a baseline level of disability is a legal determination made by a Rating Veterans Service Representative (RVSR) or Decision Review Officer, while submission of medical evidence is the responsibility of the claimant.  However, the Department of Veterans Affairs will fulfill the duty to assist the claimant with requesting medical evidence.
 
Upon receipt of evidence satisfactory to establish a baseline level of disability, request a medical examination and opinion, to include a review of the claims folder by the examiner, to establish whether increased manifestations of the NSC disability are proximately due to an SC disability.
 
Notes:  
Do not request an examination if the Veteran has failed to furnish medical evidence establishing a baseline level of the severity of the NSC disability.  If no baseline can be established, no aggravation can be demonstrated and the claim should be denied.
The examiner must have all available evidence for review when providing an opinion on the issue of aggravation.
Identify the evidence of particular relevance in the claims folder for the examiner. 
The purpose of the disability benefits questionnaire opinion request asking an examiner to describe the baseline level of severity is for the examiner to provide, to the extent possible, a description of the baseline level of severity as shown in medical evidence.  Even if an examiner cannot provide this opinion, the RVSR must assess the evidence to determine a baseline based on all available medical evidence either before aggravation occurred or as soon as possible after aggravation but before the date of receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of the NSC disability.

V.ii.2.D.1.e.  Information That Must Be Included in the Examiner’s Report for Secondary SC Based on Aggravation

The examiner’s report must separately address all of the following medical issues in order to be considered adequate for rating a claim for secondary SC based on aggravation
the current level of severity of the NSC disease or injury
an opinion as to whether an SC disability proximately caused the NSC disability to increase in severity, and
an adequate analysis with medical considerations supporting the opinion.
Reference:  For more information on requesting examinations for claims based on secondary service connection and aggravation, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.d.

V.ii.2.D.1.f.  Determining the Extent to Which an NSC Disability Was Aggravated by an SC Disability

To determine the extent to which, if any, an NSC disability was aggravated by an SC disability
determine the baseline and current levels of severity of the NSC disability under 38 CFR Part 4, Schedule for Rating Disabilities, and
deduct the baseline level of severity of the NSC disability, as well as any increase of the disability due to natural progression, from the current level.
Note:  This policy applies even when the current level of severity of the NSC disability is 100 percent, including temporary 100-percent evaluations assigned under 38 CFR 4.29 and 38 CFR 4.30.

V.ii.2.D.1.g.  Aggravation With a Zero Percent Evaluation 

Aggravation is established by any increase in severity, regardless of whether it would result in a schedular increased evaluation. 
 
Whenever there is competent and credible evidence of an increase in severity of the disability from the baseline, but the current and baseline disability would be assigned the same level of evaluation under 38 CFR Part 4, Schedule for Rating Disabilities, grant SC and assign a noncompensable evaluation. 
 
To justify SC, the degree of disability after aggravation does not have to be at least one level of evaluation higher than the baseline. 
 
Reference:  For more information on increased impairment in earning capacity that does not rise to the level of meeting the criteria for the next-higher schedular rating, see
Browder v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 204 (1991), and
Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 155 (1993).

M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 2, Section E - Service Connection (SC) for Congenital, Developmental, or Hereditary Disorders
Article ID: 554400000180485
Updated May 28, 2025

 <-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview
 

In This Section

This section contains the topic “Determining SC for Congenital, Developmental, or Hereditary Disorders.”

  
1.  Determining SC for Congenital, Developmental, or Hereditary Disorders
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on determining SC for congenital, developmental, or hereditary disorders, including
definition of 
congenital or developmental defects, and
congenital, developmental, or hereditary disease
establishing SC for congenital, developmental, or hereditary disorders
requesting medical opinions in claims for SC for congenital, developmental, or hereditary disorders
considering the 
development of symptoms of hereditary disease in service, and
aggravation of a hereditary disease in service.

Change Date

December 21, 2023

V.ii.2.E.1.a.  Definition:  Congenital or Developmental Defects

Congenital or developmental defects refer to normally static, structural, or inherent body abnormalities which are typically present at birth and are generally incapable of improvement or deterioration.  These include but are not limited to 
vertebral anomalies such as block (fused) vertebrae
atrial septal defect
pectus excavatum
mental deficiency
absent, displaced, or supernumerary parts
personality disorder, and
undescended testicles. 
Note:  The presumption of soundness does not apply to congenital defects because such defects are not diseases or injuries within the meaning of the statutes governing the presumption. 
References:  For more information on
the prohibition of service connection (SC) for congenital or developmental defects, see 
38 CFR 4.9, and
38 CFR 3.303(c), and
the inapplicability of the presumption of soundness to congenital or developmental defects, see Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378, 1385-86 (Fed. Cir. 2003).

V.ii.2.E.1.b.  Definition:  Congenital, Developmental, or Hereditary Disease 

Congenital, developmental, or hereditary diseases refer to diseases that are recognized to be congenital, developmental, or familial in origin.  A congenital, developmental, or hereditary disease may appear in adulthood and is capable of improvement or deterioration.  
Examples of congenital or hereditary diseases include but are not limited to
polycystic kidney disease
sickle cell disease
retinitis pigmentosa, and
Huntington’s chorea.
References:  For more information on handling claims for SC based on
sickle cell disease, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 9.1, and
retinitis pigmentosa, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.e.

V.ii.2.E.1.c.  Establishing SC for Congenital, Developmental, or Hereditary Disorders

Congenital or developmental defects, refractive error of the eye, personality disorders, and mental deficiency are not considered diseases or injuries under 38 CFR 3.303(c).  Since they are not diseases or injuries, they are not generally subject to SC.
However, establish SC, if warranted, for
diseases of congenital, developmental, or familial, hereditary origin that
first manifest themselves during service, or
pre-exist service and progress at an abnormally high rate during service
a hereditary or familial disease that first became manifest to a compensable degree within the presumptive period following discharge from service pursuant to 38 CFR 3.309(a), provided the rebuttable presumption provisions of 38 CFR 3.307 are satisfied, and
disabilities resulting from an overlying injury or disease of a congenital defect.
Notes:  
VAOPGCPREC 11-1999 held that M21-1 provisions created in 1964 did not preclude awarding SC for in-service aggravation of pre-existing retinitis pigmentosa.  Therefore, subsequent Department of Veterans Affairs General Counsel Precedent Opinions and M21-1 changes cannot be considered liberalizing changes. 
A degenerative condition is not a type of congenital defect.
Important:  Genetic test results showing a predisposition to a disease are not sufficient to rebut an evidentiary presumption (of soundness or that a chronic condition arose during a presumptive period).  Similarly, such a test result is insufficient to sever SC or to reduce the evaluation of a service-connected disability. 
References:  For more information on 
claims for SC involving congenital and developmental defects and diseases of familial or hereditary origin, see
Winn v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 510, 516 (1996)
Cousin v. Wilkie, 905 F.3d 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2018)
VAOPGCPREC 1-1990, March 16, 1990
VAOPGCPREC 67-1990, July 18, 1990, and
VAOPGCPREC 82-1990, July 18, 1990
congenital and developmental defects and refractive error of the eyes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.A
severance of SC, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.B
rebuttal of presumptions of SC under 38 CFR 3.307(d), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.B.1.d-f, and
the difference between an abnormal laboratory finding and a diagnosis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.1.a.

V.ii.2.E.1.d.Requesting Medical Opinions in Claims for SC for Congenital, Developmental, or Hereditary Disorders

When considering SC for a condition of congenital or developmental origin, determine whether the condition is a disease process or is simply a defect or abnormality.  In many instances, it may be necessary to request a medical opinion regarding the proper classification of a medical condition at issue.  Particularly, the examiner should be asked whether the condition is capable of improvement or deterioration.   
Although the outcome of such an opinion request is probative in determining whether a congenital or development condition is a disease or a defect, and consequently whether it is subject to SC, the opinion is not wholly determinative and must be considered in the context of the remainder of the evidentiary record.
 
Reference:  For more information on requesting medical opinions in claims for SC for congenital or developmental conditions, see Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet.App. 390 (2009).  

V.ii.2.E.1.e.  Considering the Development of Symptoms of Hereditary Disease in Service

Consider diseases of hereditary origin to be incurred in service if the pathological signs or symptoms developed after entry into active service.
 
Even if the Veteran is almost certain to eventually develop a disease, a genetic or other familial predisposition does not constitute having the disease.  Only when the evidence shows actual manifestation of symptoms or signs of pathology followed by a diagnosis, may the Veteran be said to have developed the disease.
 
Notes:  
At what point the Veteran starts to manifest signs or symptoms is a factual, medical determination that must be based upon
the medical evidence of record in each case, and
sound medical judgment.
The only prerequisite for the application of the presumption of soundness is that the Veteran’s entry examination be clear of any noted diseases or disabilities.  When the presumption of soundness applies, it can only be rebutted with clear and unmistakable evidence that the injury or disease existed prior to and was not aggravated by service. 
References:  For more information on 
the presumption of soundness, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.2, and
genetic test results and determinations regarding presumptions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.E.1.c.

V.ii.2.E.1.f.    Considering the Aggravation of a Hereditary Disease in Service

A hereditary disease that manifests some symptoms before entry into active service may be found to have been aggravated during service if it progresses during service at a rate greater than normally expected according to accepted medical authority.
 
Note:  This is a factual, medical determination that must be based upon the evidence of record and sound medical judgment.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 3, Section A - Determining the Issues
Article ID: 554400000180486
Updated Jun 24, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
 Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Types of Issues and Claims
2
Considering Issues Within Scope of a Claim 
3
Other Issues to Consider


 
1.  Types of Issues and Claims
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about the various types of issues and claims, including
recognizing issues and claims when preparing a rating decision
definition and example of
expressly claimed issue
issues within scope
unclaimed subordinate issues
ancillary benefits, and
compensation entitlement issues
considering intent of new claims, and
clarifying claims and issues.

Change Date

June 24, 2025

V.ii.3.A.1.a.  Recognizing Issues and Claims When Preparing a Rating Decision

When preparing a rating decision, the decision maker must recognize, develop, clarify, and/or decide all issues and claims, whether they are
expressly claimed
within scope of an expressly claimed issue, such as
complications/residuals of the claimed condition, or
unclaimed subordinate issues and ancillary benefits, or
compensation entitlement issues that arise based on the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) review of evidence, such as 
reductions of service-connected (SC) disability evaluation
clear and unmistakable errors (CUEs)
entitlement under the Nehmer stipulation, or
competency reviews.
References:  For more information on
considering subordinate issues and ancillary benefits, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2
solicitation of claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G
issues within scope of a claim, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.c, and
38 CFR 3.155(d)(2)
treating complications/residuals of a disability as within the scope of a claim, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c
ancillary benefits, see
38 CFR 3.155(d)(2), and 
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, and
compensation entitlement issues that arise based on VA’s review of evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.f.

V.ii.3.A.1.b.  Definition and Example:  Expressly Claimed Issue  

An expressly claimed issue is defined as when a disability and the benefit sought are both explicitly identified on a standardized VA form. 
 
Example:  Epilepsy is listed as a claimed disability on VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.
 
References:  For more information on
how to file a claim, see 38 CFR 3.155
standardized VA forms, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a, and
status of claims, see 38 CFR 3.160.

V.ii.3.A.1.c.  Definition and Example: Issues Within Scope

An issue within scope is one that is not explicitly identified by the claimant on a one of the forms listed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a, but is identified upon review of the claims folder during the decision-making process for an expressly claimed issue.  An issue within scope arises based on a sympathetic reading of the claimant’s statements and/or evidence of record.  It encompasses such things as entitlement to
any ancillary benefits that arise as a result of the adjudication decision
additional benefits for complications/residuals of an expressly claimed condition, and
unclaimed primary or causal disabilities, when service connection (SC) is warranted for the expressly claimed secondary disability and the unclaimed causal disability.
Notes:  
VA does not expect, nor does the law require, claimants to articulate with medical precision the disabilities for which compensation is sought.  Veterans regularly claim disability compensation for a specific clinical entity and ultimately establish SC for a similar, but clinically distinct, condition.
When an individual expressly claims a specific disability and is later diagnosed with a different but potentially-related condition, if a sympathetic reading of the claim shows that the diagnosed condition is encompassed by the claim, VA must address the claim as including the diagnosed condition, as discussed in Grimes v. McDonough, 34 Vet.App. 84 (2021).  
Example 1:  VA may, in developing a Veteran’s claim for SC for sinusitis, provide the Veteran with an examination that renders a diagnosis of a similar condition, such as allergic rhinitis, rather than sinusitis. 
 
Result:  In the event that the examination is otherwise sufficient for rating purposes and the condition is associated with service, the decision maker awards SC for allergic rhinitis as within the scope of the claim for sinusitis.
 
Example 2:  The Veteran’s VA examination shows that there is sufficient evidence to justify an increased evaluation of 70 percent for SC posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  In addition, the Veteran reported being fired from several jobs due to an inability to deal with stress, and the VA examiner identified the Veteran’s stress management problem as a symptom of PTSD.
 
Result:  The decision maker addresses the issue of individual unemployability (IU) in the rating decision as described in M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.C.3.
 
Example 3:  The Veteran submits a claim for SC for right knee strain.  The evidence of record, including the resulting examination, shows that SC for the knee strain is warranted.  The examination also reveals a knee scar that resulted from a post-service arthroscopy procedure.  The examination indicates the arthroscopy was associated with the SC right knee strain.  The examination also shows that the scar is not painful or unstable and is less than 6 square inches. 
 
Result:  In the event that the examination is otherwise sufficient for rating purposes, the decision maker awards SC for the knee condition and separate SC for the noncompensable knee scar as within the scope of the claim for SC for right knee strain.
Example 4:  The Veteran submits a claim for SC for hearing loss, earaches, and sinusitis.  Later, the Veteran submits a lay statement reporting that everyday sounds cause discomfort.  Private medical records show a diagnosis of hyperacusis.  Hyperacusis was also diagnosed during the VA audiology examination. 
Result:  In view of the evidence, the expressly claimed issue of SC for hearing loss and earaches must be sympathetically read as encompassing the diagnosed disability hyperacusis.  Decreased sound tolerance (hyperacusis) reasonably falls within the claim for an audiological condition manifested by hearing deficits and ear pain.  If the examination is otherwise sufficient for rating purposes, make a decision on SC for hyperacusis.  Otherwise defer for a new and/or adequate examination or other required development.  
 
References:  For more information on
sympathetic reading of a claim, see 
Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed.Cir. 2009), and
Grimes v. McDonough, 34 Vet.App. 84 (2021)  
scope of claim, see
38 CFR 3.155(d)(2), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2
identifying and developing for reasonably raised IU claims, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.f and g, and
tinnitus associated with claims for SC for hearing loss, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.a.

V.ii.3.A.1.d.  Definition and Example: Unclaimed Subordinate Issues

Unclaimed subordinate issues are issues derived from the consideration or outcome of related issues.  Often, the primary and subordinate issues share the same fact pattern.
 
Example:  SC for treatment purposes under 38 U.S.C. 1702 based on a denial of SC for compensation purposes is considered a subordinate issue
for a psychosis based on wartime service, or
for any mental disorder based on Gulf War service, and
when entitlement is shown under 38 U.S.C. 1702.
References:  For more information on
subordinate issues, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2, and
when to address entitlement to SC for treatment purposes under 38 U.S.C. 1702 by rating, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 3.C.1.f.

V.ii.3.A.1.e.  Definition and Example: Ancillary Benefits

Ancillary benefits are secondary benefits that are considered when evaluating claims for
compensation
pension, or
Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC).
Note:  Eligibility for ancillary benefits is derived from a Veteran’s entitlement to disability benefits or the circumstances of the Veteran’s death.
 
Example:  The Veteran is granted a 100-percent evaluation for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and complications.  VA examination shows that the Veteran requires daily assistance with activities of daily living.
 
Result:  The rating activity addresses the issues of aid and attendance (A&A), Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA), specially adapted housing (SAH), and automobile allowance and adaptive equipment in the rating decision.
 
Reference:  For more information on subordinate issues and ancillary benefits, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.

V.ii.3.A.1.f.  Definition and Example:  Compensation Entitlement Issues 

Compensation entitlement issues arise upon VA’s review of evidence and do not require a claim from the beneficiary in order to be brought to issue.  This includes issues such as
reductions of SC disability evaluations
CUEs
entitlement under the Nehmer stipulation, or
competency reviews.
Situation:  A Veteran, who is SC for bilateral knee arthritis, claims an increased disability evaluation for the left knee.  The examination includes a full evaluation of both knees.  The Veteran’s SC right knee, which has been evaluated as 30-percent disabling for three years, shows improvement consistent with 38 CFR 3.344 and M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.A.1.b.  The treatment reports are consistent with the examination findings.
 
Result:  The rating decides the expressly claimed left knee evaluation and proposes a reduced evaluation for the right knee, as the overall combined evaluation will be reduced.
 
Rationale:  The examination report and treatment records both show the condition has improved and warrants reduction.  The evaluation has been in effect for less than five years and may be reduced on one examination.  As the combined evaluation is affected, the regional office (RO) must apply the provisions of 38 CFR 3.105(e) and propose the reduction.  
 
Situation:  A Veteran files a claim for an increased disability evaluation for SC lumbar strain.  While processing the claim, the rating activity notices an earlier effective date under the Nehmer stipulation is warranted for the SC ischemic heart disease based on treatment records that were in file at the time a prior claim was decided.
 
Result:  The rating decision decides both the expressly claimed lumbar spine issue and awards entitlement to an earlier effective date under the Nehmer stipulation.
 
Rationale:  Claimants do not have to file claims for consideration of an earlier effective date under the Nehmer stipulation.  As records support entitlement, the decision maker should award the earlier effective date under 38 CFR 3.816.
 
References:  For more information on
reductions, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.A
CUEs, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A
the Nehmer stipulation, see 
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 2.A, and
the Nehmer Training Guide, and
competency reviews, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.A.

V.ii.3.A.1.g.  Considering Intent of New Claims

Avoid confusing the "sympathetic reading" doctrine and within-scope analysis discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.c with a reading that 
misconstrues or makes generalized assumptions about the Veteran's intent in contending a specific disability, and/or
narrows the scope of potential for the claim's consideration.
Unless adjudicative judgment and/or review of available evidence suggests that an alternative reading would better serve the Veteran and result in maximizing the potential for benefit entitlement, decide each expressly claimed issue on its factual merits.
 
Example 1:  A Veteran who received an Afghanistan Campaign Medal was previously denied SC for depression on the basis that no mental health symptoms became manifest during service.  The decision notice communicating the denial was dated August 17, 2016.  On January 5, 2018, VA receives a claim for SC for PTSD.
 
Result:  The RO must decide the PTSD claim on its individual merits, without regard to the previous denial of SC for depression, in spite of the contentions’ symptomatic similarities, as
the holding in Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009), does not require that all mental health claims be treated as one
38 CFR 3.304(f) provides additional means by which SC for PTSD can be established, and
receipt of the Afghanistan Campaign Medal would generally satisfy the requirement for a stressor involving service in an area of potential hostile military or terrorist activity.
Example 2:  A Veteran who is currently SC for bronchial asthma, evaluated as 30-percent disabling, files a claim for SC for obstructive sleep apnea requiring the use of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device.
 
Result:  The RO must decide the sleep apnea claim on its individual merits and not generally assume that the Veteran, in contending a separate respiratory condition, intended to seek an increased evaluation for SC asthma.  Although 38 CFR 4.96(a)would prohibit the assignment of separate compensable evaluations for both asthma and sleep apnea if SC for the latter were ultimately awarded, 38 CFR 4.97, diagnostic code (DC) 6847, may permit assignment of a greater collective evaluation in light of the required CPAP use.
 
References:  For more information on
clarifying issues and claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.h, and
considering diagnosed conditions as bases for separate and distinct claims, see
Boggs v. Peake, 520 F.3d 1330, (2008), and
Velez v. Shinseki, 23 Vet.App. 199 (2009).

V.ii.3.A.1.h.  Clarifying Issues and Claims

Whenever the disability claimed is not clearly identified, ensure that the claim clarification procedures outlined in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.c have been followed and documented prior to issuing a rating decision.
 

 
2.  Considering Issues Within Scope of a Claim
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about considering issues within scope of a claim, including
types of ancillary benefits
when to address subordinate issues and ancillary benefits
considering complications of an expressly claimed issue, and
considering an unclaimed primary disability associated with a claimed complication or secondary condition.

Change Date

June 24, 2025

V.ii.3.A.2.a.  Types of Ancillary Benefits

Some types of ancillary benefits are 
DEA under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35
SAH under 38 CFR 3.809
special home adaptation (SHA) grants under 38 CFR 3.809a
automobile and adaptive equipment under 38 CFR 3.808
vocational rehabilitation/employment, and
loan guaranty for surviving spouses under 38 CFR 3.805.
Reference:  For more information on ancillary benefits, see 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.e, and
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i.

V.ii.3.A.2.b.  When to Address Subordinate Issues and Ancillary Benefits

Use the table below to determine when to address entitlement or basic eligibility as applicable to subordinate issues and ancillary benefits in a rating decision.
 
Note:  In general, address entitlement to a subordinate issue or ancillary benefit only when entitlement can be awarded.  Do not put a benefit at issue merely to deny it.
 
Exception:  Consider a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 3.324 in all applicable ratings regardless of whether the benefit is awarded or denied.   
 
If …
Then in the rating decision address …
there is a severe degree of disability involving
the loss or loss of use of an extremity or sensory organ, or
any other functional loss providing entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 CFR 3.350
SMC.
a permanent and total (P&T) SC evaluation is established
on a schedular basis, or
based on entitlement to IU
DEA.
 
Note:  Also consider entitlement to DEA whenever permanency of a total evaluation is subsequently established. Do not put entitlement at issue merely to deny it.
 
References:  For more information on
handling free-standing requests for P&T status in compensation cases, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.d
P&T evaluations, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4, and
determining entitlement to DEA, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 1.A.
a single 100-percent evaluation is assigned in a compensation or pension case
A&A.
 
Note:  Do not put A&A benefits at issue if the evidence does not show entitlement.
a single 100-percent evaluation is assigned in a compensation or pension case, and
A&A is not payable
housebound.
 
Note:  Do not address entitlement to housebound benefits if the evidence does not show entitlement exists.
retroactive Veterans Pension is not claimed, but a qualifying disability may exist
retroactive benefits.
 
Note:  Advise the claimant that retroactive benefits may be payable.
 
Reference:  For more information on retroactive pensions, see 38 CFR 3.400(b)(1)(ii)(B).
a pension claimant fails to meet the schedular requirements for P&T disability
extra-schedular consideration under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(2).
a Veteran has
no compensable evaluation(s), and
more than one noncompensable evaluation
a 10-percent rating under 38 CFR 3.324.
 
Important: 
This benefit must be considered in all applicable ratings, including confirmed ratings, even when entitlement is denied.
An applicable rating is one in which a noncompensable SC evaluation is assigned or confirmed.
The guidance expressed in this row applies without regard to whether or not the Veteran is in receipt of SMC separate and distinct from the noncompensable schedular evaluations.
a claim for SC is denied for
a psychosis based on wartime service, or
any mental disorder based on Gulf War service
Reference:  For more information on periods of war, see 38 CFR 3.2.
treatment under 38 U.S.C. 1702.
 
Note:  Do not address entitlement if the evidence does not show entitlement exists.
there is a reasonable probability that the Veteran’s death may be SC, whether from
disease
injury, or
self-infliction, and
a claim for survivors benefits is received
DIC.
at the time of death the Veteran was rated 100-percent disabled due to SC disabilities or entitled to IU, and
a claim for survivors benefits is received
DIC under 38 U.S.C. 1318, if SC for cause of death cannot be awarded, and
DEA under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35  if DIC under 38 U.S.C. 1318 is awarded.
a rating initially establishes, as specified in M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.B.1.b and c, that a(n)
Veteran is entitled to Chapter 11 compensation for a qualifying condition(s), or
active duty service member has a qualifying condition(s) incurred or aggravated in the line of duty (LOD)
SAH.
 
Reference:  For more information on entitlement to SAH, see
38 U.S.C. 2101(a), and
38 CFR 3.809.
a rating initially establishes, as specified in M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.B.1.d, that a(n)
Veteran is entitled to Chapter 11 compensation for a qualifying condition(s), or
active duty service member has a qualifying condition(s) incurred or aggravated in the LOD
SHA.
 
Reference:  For more information on entitlement to SHA, see
38 U.S.C. 2101(b), and
38 CFR 3.809a.
a rating initially establishes, as specified in M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.A.1.a, that a(n)
Veteran is entitled to Chapter 11 compensation for a qualifying disability, or
active duty service member has a qualifying disability incurred or aggravated during such service
automobile, and
automobile adaptive equipment.
Reference:  For more information on entitlement to an automobile or automobile adaptive equipment, see
38 CFR 3.808, and
38 U.S.C. 3902.
a rating initially establishes, as specified in M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 2.A.1.c, that a(n)
Veteran is entitled to Chapter 11 compensation for a qualifying disability, or
active duty service member has a qualifying disability incurred or aggravated during such service
automobile adaptive equipment.
SC is established for diabetes mellitus, and
there is a diagnosis of hypertension
SC for hypertension as secondary to diabetes mellitus only as described in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2.f.
the schedular disability requirements for IU under 38 CFR 4.16(a) are met, and
there is evidence in the Veteran’s claims folder or under VA control that indicates the Veteran may be unemployable due to SC disability
IU.
 
Reference:  For more information on reasonably raised claims for IU, see
Norris v. West, 12 Vet.App. 413 (1999)
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.B.1.f, and 
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 3.C.3.f.
 
Reference:  For information on raising the issue of competency while evaluating other evidence, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.A.2.a.

V.ii.3.A.2.c.  Considering Complications of an Expressly Claimed Issue

When deciding expressly claimed issues, decision makers must consider entitlement to compensation for any complications/residuals that are within scope of the claim, including, but not limited to, those identified by the rating criteria for that condition in 38 CFR Part 4.  A specific claim is not required to award a within-scope complication/residual.
 
Decision makers will consider all lay and medical evidence of record in order to adjudicate entitlement to any additional benefits for complications or other residuals of a claimed issue, such as:
complications of diabetes mellitus
residuals of cancer or treatment for the SC cancer
scars as the result of surgical intervention for an SC disability
neurological disabilities related to the spine
complications of progressive disorders, such as
ALS, or
multiple sclerosis (MS), or
constitutional symptoms caused by systemic disorders, such as
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), or
ankylosing spondylitis.
Notes: 
The above list is not intended to be comprehensive.  Decision makers must consider the evidence in each case and determine whether additional issues are within scope.
With respect to residuals of cancer or treatment, in Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet.App. 188 (2021) the court held that although residuals of prostate cancer under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7528 are rated as voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction, whichever is predominant, other residual disability caused or aggravated by cancer, or its treatment, may be within scope if reasonably raised by the evidence.  38 CFR 3.155(d)(2) and 38 CFR 3.160 require VA to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary SC when the claim for the disabilities is reasonably raised during the adjudication of a formally initiated claim for re-evaluation of the primary SC disability.
Entitlement to SC for the complication/residual, unless explicitly claimed, should only be placed at issue when entitlement is established.  When entitlement is not established, but relevant evidence is present, discussing the relevant evidence is appropriate for inclusion in the Reasons for Decision of the expressly claimed issue. 
When evidence shows the presence of a potential complication/residual, decision makers must ensure there is adequate medical evidence, including an examination, if needed, in order to determine entitlement.
References:  For more information on
complications of diabetes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2
when to consider scars as part of a claim, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 10
neurological complications of the spine, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.3.d, and
rating
ALS and MS, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.C
RA, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C, and
ankylosing spondylitis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.3.

V.ii.3.A.2.d.  Considering an Unclaimed Primary Disability Associated With a Claimed Complication or Secondary Condition

When a claim for SC for a disability is pending, and subsequent development of the claim reveals that the claimed disability is caused by another unclaimed disability that may be associated with service, the decision maker must investigate the possibility of SC for the unclaimed primary (or causal) disability, as well as, SC on a secondary basis for the claimed disability.  
The duty to investigate SC for the causal disability is within scope of the claimed condition when the evidence
suggests that an expressly claimed disability arises from, is secondary to, or has aggravated the unclaimed causal disability, and
criteria under 38 CFR 3.159(c)(4) have been satisfied.
If the unclaimed causal disability is shown to be related to service, the pending claim reasonably encompasses a claim for benefits for the causal disability.  A separate claim form is not required when this fact pattern exists and the unclaimed causal disability can be adjudicated as within the scope of the expressly claimed disability. 
Example:  A Veteran files a claim for SC for right shoulder pain as the result of a fall caused by instability of the right knee which is not SC and has not otherwise been expressly claimed.  Development of the claim confirms a diagnosis of right shoulder impingement that is secondary to the unclaimed knee condition.  The knee injury (resulting in recurrent instability of the right knee) was sustained in service, and current medical evidence shows treatment for continued symptoms since the Veteran’s discharge.  Sufficient evidence to establish SC for the knee disability is of record, and the medical evidence shows the right shoulder disability was directly caused by the fall that occurred when the Veteran’s knee buckled unexpectedly.  Consider the unclaimed knee disability within scope of the claimed shoulder disability.
References:  For more information on
addressing within in the scope issue, see 38 CFR 3.155(d)(2)
establishing causation for secondary SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.D.1.b
when a medical opinion is required, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1, and
the correlation between effective date for primary and secondary SC disabilities, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.3.g.

 
3.  Other Issues to Consider
 

Change Date

June 24, 2025

V.ii.3.A.3.a.  Other Issues to Consider When Evaluating Evidence

The table below lists matters to consider, in addition to determining issues within the scope of the claim as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1 and 2, when evaluating the evidence submitted with a claim.
 
Note:  In all substantially complete claims, consider the provisions of 38 CFR 3.155(d)(2) and M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1 and 2, and adjudicate any issues considered within scope of the claim. 
 
If the issue is …
Then consider …
SC
soliciting claims for unclaimed, chronic disabilities shown by the evidence.
Notes:
The mere presence of medical evidence does not constitute a claim because there is no intent to apply for benefits shown.
Solicit a claim to determine whether  the Veteran wishes to pursue the unclaimed disabilities (or “issues”) by submitting a claim on a prescribed VA form. Provide the Veteran with information about how to obtain the prescribed form.
References:  For more information on
considering unclaimed theories of SC, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.e
the types of issues and claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.a
considering a claimant’s intent to file a claim, see 
38 CFR 3.155(d)(1), and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A, and
prescribed forms for filing a claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a.
secondary SC
whether the
non-service-connected (NSC) condition is the direct result of the SC condition
SC condition has worsened the NSC condition beyond normal progression and, if so, what was the baseline level of disability prior to aggravation and what is the level currently, or
evidence shows the secondary disability is caused by an unclaimed primary disability that also warrants SC.
Examples:
A Veteran has an SC left knee injury. As a result of favoring the left knee, a right knee disability develops that is secondary to the original SC disability.
A Veteran develops a heart condition secondary to SC diabetes.
References:  For more information on 
claims for secondary SC based on the worsening of an NSC condition, see
Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 439 (1995)
Ward, Neal v. Wilkie (2019), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.D.1, and
considering an unclaimed primary disability associated with a claimed complication or secondary condition, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.d.
SC for PTSD
whether the claimed stressor
may be established on the basis of the Veteran’s lay testimony alone under 38 CFR 3.304(f), or
must be corroborated with additional evidence.
Reference:  For more information on rating PTSD claims, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.D and E.
SC for an undiagnosed illness (Gulf War)
evidence of
active military, navy, or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Gulf War
the manifestation of one or more signs or symptoms of undiagnosed illness
objective indications of chronic disability, and
a nexus between the chronic disability and the undiagnosed illness.
Reference:  For more information on SC for disabilities associated with Southwest Asia service  under 38 CFR 3.317, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart ii.
entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. U.S.C. 1151
whether
hospital, medical, or surgical treatment or vocational rehabilitation was rendered by VA, and
an increase in disability occurred and, if so, was it due to an
instance of fault of VA, or
event not reasonably foreseeable, such as an accident.
Note:  Do not solicit a claim for compensation under 38 U.S.C. 1151 by sending an application to a potential beneficiary solely because the evidence of record suggests or raises the possibility that 38 U.S.C. 1151 may be applicable.
 
Reference:  For more information on compensation under 38 U.S.C. 1151, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 6.A-C.
evaluation of a disability
old and new criteria when a rating schedule revision has occurred, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.m
DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995), if applicable to the musculoskeletal condition, and
whether a referral for consideration of an extra- schedular evaluation is warranted.
Note:  38 CFR 3.105(e) is only applicable when there is both a reduction in evaluation and a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payable.
 
References:  For more information on determining whether
DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995), applies to a musculoskeletal condition, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A, and
38 CFR 3.105(e) applies to reduction of a disability evaluation, see VAOPGCPREC 71-1991.
entitlement to pension
whether the disabilities meet the schedular requirements.
 
Note:  The extra-schedular provisions of 38 CFR 3.321(b)(2) must also be considered if schedular requirements are not met.
 
Reference:  For more information on schedular requirements, see
38 CFR 4.16, and
38 CFR 4.17.
entitlement to retroactive pension
entitlement under 38 CFR 3.400(b)(1)(ii), if a qualifying disability exists.
denial of maximum evaluation
assigning the next higher evaluation.
a disability falling between schedular grades
entitlement to the higher evaluation under 38 CFR 4.7, if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the higher rating. Otherwise, assign the lower evaluation.
 
References:  For more information on
the difference between cumulative, successive, and variable criteria and whether 38 CFR 4.7applies, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.a
variable rating criteria, see
Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet.App. 152 (2009), and
Middleton v. Shinseki, 727 F.3d 1172 (Fed. Cir. 2013), and
cumulative or successive rating criteria, see
Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 360 (2007), and
Middleton v. Shinseki, 727 F.3d 1172 (Fed. Cir. 2013).
a death case
accrued benefits if 
a disability claim was pending at the time of death, and
a claimant has submitted the appropriate form from among those listed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a.
Reference:  For more information on accrued benefits, see M21-1, Part XI, Subpart ii, 3.A-E.
a supplemental claim for Veterans Pension that involves
evidence of new disabilities, or
a change in the evaluation of any previously- evaluated disabilities
Veterans Pension with a formal, coded rating decision.
a claim for a temporary total evaluation for hospitalization under 38 CFR 4.29or convalescence under 38 CFR 4.30
either claim under 38 CFR 4.29 or 4.30 as part of a claim for increased evaluation for the underlying disability(ies).
P&T disability status
guidance discussed in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.d.
References:  For more information on 
P&T evaluation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4, and
entitlement to DEA associated with a P&T evaluation, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 1.A.
 
Reference:  For more information on the requirement of a complete claim, see
38 CFR 3.155(d)(1)
38 CFR 3.159
38 CFR 3.160(a), and
M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 3, Section B - Making Partial Rating Decisions
Article ID: 554400000180487
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section 

This section contains the topic “General Information on Partial Rating Decisions and Deferred Issues.” 

1.  General Information on Partial Rating Decisions and Deferred Issues
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about partial rating decisions and deferred issues, including
when development to obtain additional evidence may be needed
definition of partial rating decision
when to make a partial rating decision
partial ratings and automation
improper use of a partial rating decision for service connection (SC) for cause of death
when to defer an issue
procedure for deferring previously denied issues, and
action to take when SC for cause of death is deferred for further development.

Change Date

November 15, 2023

V.ii.3.B.1.a.  When Development to Obtain Additional Evidence May Be Needed
 
Development to obtain additional evidence such as a medical examination or other records may be needed if
it would provide a more complete picture of a question at issue, or
the evidence of record is questionable or conflicting.
Note:  Decision makers must maintain objectivity when assigning weight to a claimant’s evidence and may not develop with the purpose of obtaining evidence to justify a denial of the claim.  Instead, decision makers must be able to support the determination that development is needed.
 
References:  For more information on 
ordering further development in cases where uncorroborated lay evidence is presented, see Douglas v. Shinseki, 23 Vet.App. 19 (2009) 
a Veteran’s submission of evidence and refusal to attend a Department of Veterans Affairs examination, see Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet.App. 171 (2005), and
developing with the purpose of denying and explaining the need for development, see Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet.App. 305 (2003).

V.ii.3.B.1.b.  Definition:  Partial Rating Decision

A partial rating decision is a rating decision that provides a decision on some issues of a claim, but defers a decision on at least one other issue, pending the outcome of additional development. 

V.ii.3.B.1.c.  When to Make a Partial Rating Decision

Make a partial rating decision when one or more issues require additional development before they can be decided, but the record otherwise contains sufficient evidence to 
decide (favorably or not) at least one other issue, and/or
make a proposed or final decision on a compensation entitlement issue, such as a reduction in service-connected disability evaluation, severance of service connection (SC), or competency.
Important:  
It is only appropriate to extend suspense or diary dates if it is necessary for a specific adjudicative action.  Suspense dates must always correspond with specific actions and should not be arbitrarily extended under any circumstance.
When employees handle a claim, they are expected to take the most full and complete action possible on a claim every time – including development, rating, and promulgation actions – to move a claim forward to accurate completion in the claims process.  Every effort should be made to move the claim to the next processing cycle each time it is handled.
Exception:  When issues cannot be resolved because of a Veteran’s return to active duty, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 2.A.1.c.
 
References:  For more information on
evaluating competency, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.A
proposed rating decisions, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 3.D
reductions in awards, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.B, and
severance of SC, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.B.

V.ii.3.B.1.d.  Partial Ratings and Automation  

When a claim involves a mix of automation-eligible and automation-ineligible contentions in a ready for decision status,
defer automation-ineligible contentions that have not undergone initial development, and
review the automation-eligible contention(s) for completion of a partial rating decision.
References:  For more information on
identifying automation-eligible contentions, see the Automated Issue Management (AIM) Quick Sheet for Claims Processors, and
deferring automation-eligible contentions, see the Automated Decision Support Deferral Guide.

V.ii.3.B.1.e.  Improper Use of a Partial Rating Decision for SC for Cause of Death

Do not use a partial rating decision to deny SC for cause of death if development is pending or in progress for another condition possibly involved in the cause of death.

V.ii.3.B.1.f.  When to Defer an Issue

Defer an issue when the rating activity receives a claim that is underdeveloped or incomplete when proper disposition of that issue depends on resolution of a development action.
Reference:  For more information on Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) deferrals, see 
M21-4, Chapter 6, 8.e for Veterans Service Center guidance 
M21-4, Chapter 7, 14 for pension management center guidance, and
VBMS Deferral Job Aids.

V.ii.3.B.1.g.  Procedure for Deferring Previously Denied Issues

When a decision on a previously denied issue must now be deferred, decision makers should ensure the coded conclusion of the Codesheet lists the
previously denied issue as deferred, and
date of the prior denial in the ORIGINAL DATE OF DENIAL field.
Example:
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III.iv.6.A.1.f_blocktext.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
Follow the steps in the table below when deferring a previously denied issue.
Step
Action
1
Ensure the
previously denied issue is reflected on the MASTER RECORD tab in VBMS-Rating, and
appropriate date is listed in the ORIGINAL DATE OF DENIAL field.
Example: 
 
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/46c37a66-3924-459d-a46a-be70ff7d6794" \* MERGEFORMATINET 
 
References:  For more information on
required elements of the coded conclusion, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.3.a, and
backfilling the master record, see the VBMS Rating User Guide.
2
On the ISSUE MANAGEMENT tab, follow the steps for establishing issues outlined in the VBMS Rating User Guide.
3
Select the relevant issue in the ISSUE LIST field and click on the ENTER DECISION button.
4
From the SELECT EVALUATION BUILDER screen, 
choose Disability Decision Information – Manual Entry, and 
click on the OK button.
5
On the DISABILITY DECISION INFORMATION screen, choose Deferred from the DECISION drop-down menu.
6
Complete the other required decision entries.
References:  For more information on 
completing rating decisions, see the VBMS Rating User Guide, and
the ORIGINAL DATE OF DENIAL field, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.9.b.

V.ii.3.B.1.h.Action to Take When SC for Cause of Death Is Deferred for Further Development

If the rating activity returns a case for further development with regard to the issue of SC for cause of death,
request the indicated evidence
award pension benefits if entitlement is established and an award was not made prior to submission of the case to the rating activity, and
establish a 30-day control for submission of the requested evidence.
Once the 30-day evidentiary submission period has elapsed, resubmit the case to the rating activity for issuance of a formal decision on the issue of SC for cause of death.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 3, Section C - Reviewing Diagnoses
Article ID: 554400000180488
Updated Sep 30, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
 
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Principles for Review of Diagnoses
2
Diagnoses Associated With Functional Impairment of Earning Capacity
3
Diagnoses Associated With Obesity
4
Claims Involving Contentions of Infertility


  
1.  General Principles for Review of Diagnoses

Introduction

This topic includes information on the general principles for review of diagnoses in claims for disability compensation, including
requirement for a disability
subthreshold diagnoses
elective procedures, and
abnormal laboratory findings.

Change Date

October 1, 2020

V.ii.3.C.1.a. Requirement for a Disability 

In a determination of service connection (SC) , the evidence must show that a disability exists as is described in 38 U.S.C. 1110 and 38 U.S.C. 1131.
 
In some situations, regulations prescribe the criteria that must be met to establish a disability diagnosis for Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) purposes, such as for
hearing loss, as provided by 38 CFR 3.385
hypertension, as provided by 38 CFR 4.104, diagnostic code (DC) 7101, or
mental disorders, as provided by 38 CFR 4.125.
In other situations, there is no statutory or regulatory prescription for a given disability.  Reviewing the probative value and weight of a disability diagnosis is a key aspect of evidentiary review.
 
Reference:  For more information on reviewing and weighing evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart i, 1.A.

V.ii.3.C.1.b.  Subthreshold Diagnoses

When specific diagnostic criteria exist for a disability, a treating physician may utilize a subthreshold diagnosis for the purpose of treating the symptoms when not all symptoms required for the diagnosis are present.  Subthreshold diagnoses, such as pre-hypertension, pre-diabetes, Parkinson-like tremor, and others, are not adequate for use as a confirmed diagnosis for rating purposes.  When a subthreshold diagnosis is made and the known diagnostic criteria are clearly not met, do not return a medical examination to clarify the diagnosis.
 
Although a subthreshold diagnosis is acceptable for medical treatment purposes, it is not considered a ratable disability for compensation purposes. 
 
Reference:  For more information on considering a diagnosis of pre-hypertension, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.3.d.

V.ii.3.C.1.c.  Elective Procedures

Elective procedures, such as vasectomy, cosmetic breast reduction, or kidney donation, are not congruent with the provisions required for the purpose of SC of a disease or injury incurred coincident with a Veteran’s active service.  However, unusual or unanticipated outcomes resulting in an actually disabling condition that arise as a result of an in-service elective procedure may be subject to SC.
 
References:  For more information on considering SC for
elective breast surgery, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.B.1.d
elective laser eye/LASIK surgery, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.A.3.d, and
kidney donation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.5.b.

V.ii.3.C.1.d.  Abnormal Laboratory Findings 

Abnormal laboratory findings, even if diagnosed, are not themselves disabilities subject to compensation for VA purposes.  Such findings include, but are not limited to,
elevated blood sugar
hyperlipidemia
elevated triglycerides, or
elevated cholesterol.
Notes:
Although an abnormal laboratory finding is not a disability subject to compensation, a claim for SC for an abnormal laboratory finding meets the criteria for a complete claim as defined in 38 CFR 3.160(a)(4).  Provided that all other criteria for a complete claim have been satisfied, the claim for SC for an abnormal laboratory finding requires full adjudication by rating decision.  
Clarification may be necessary when there is a claim for a benefit based upon laboratory findings.
Do not solicit a claim based merely on abnormal laboratory findings discovered in the service treatment records.
Example:  A claim for SC for “blood sugar” or “high blood sugar” may have been intended as a claim for diabetes.  Development could substantiate that elevated blood sugar readings in service represented the onset of diabetes first diagnosed after service or that diabetes may have been diagnosed in a presumptive period. 

2.  Diagnoses Associated With Functional Impairment of Earning Capacity

Introduction

This topic includes policies and procedures for determining whether pain or another condition may be accepted as a disability diagnosis based on whether there is associated functional impairment of earning capacity, including
conditions resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity
evidentiary requirements to demonstrate functional impairment of earning capacity
impact of
Saunders v. Wilkie on diagnoses of pain, and
Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie on determinations regarding functional impairment of earning capacity
examples of diagnosis of pain, and
example of functional impairment of earning capacity due to other condition.

Change Date

September 8, 2022

V.ii.3.C.2.a.  Conditions Resulting in Functional Impairment of Earning Capacity 

Pain alone or any condition resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity, even in the absence of a specific diagnosis or otherwise identified disease or injury, may constitute a disability under 38 U.S.C. 1110 or 38 U.S.C. 1131 for which SC may be granted. 
The Veteran’s pain or condition must result in functional impairment of earning capacity to constitute a disability.  The term disability under 38 U.S.C. 1110 refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of such disability.  Therefore, pain alone or a condition resulting functional impairment of earning capacity, even in the absence of a diagnosis, can serve as a functional impairment and qualify as a disability under 38 U.S.C. 1110 or 38 U.S.C. 1131irrespective of the underlying cause.
Functional impairment of earning capacity must be demonstrated by credible medical and/or lay evidence.  Functional impairment of earning capacity refers to limited ability or inability to perform occupational tasks to the extent that work performance, thus earning capacity, is impaired.  Examples of functional impairment of earning capacity include, but are not limited to,
inability to perform certain movements or tasks due to pain
time lost from work due to pain, or
pain resulting in increased fatigability or incoordination affecting job performance.
Subjective pain or other complaint(s) does not, by itself, establish the presence of a disability for the purposes of establishing SC.  The decision maker must weigh a Veteran’s lay assertion of pain or other complaint(s) against any contrary medical or other evidence in determining the probative value of the evidence of record for the purpose of deciding whether a current disability is demonstrated. 
The pain or other condition must cause functional impairment of earning capacity to constitute a disability, but there is no requirement that the pain manifest to a compensable level to establish the presence of a current disability under the law.
Pain or a condition resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity is sufficient evidence of a disability for any body system and is not limited to the musculoskeletal body system.
References:  For more information on
considering functional impairment of earning capacity due to
a diagnosis of pain, as held in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.2.c, and
other conditions, as held in Martinez Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet.App. 393 (2020), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.2.d
assigning effective dates based on judicial precedents, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.7.a, and
determining the credibility of evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.b.

V.ii.3.C.2.b.  Evidentiary Requirements to Demonstrate Functional Impairment of Earning Capacity 

The rating schedule may serve as a proxy for determining whether certain manifestations are capable of impairing earning capacity.  However, there must be competent evidence specific to the claimant tending to show that the impairment rises to a level to affect earning capacity, which may include showing manifestations of a similar severity, frequency, and duration as those identified in the rating schedule as capable of causing impaired earning capacity in an average person.  Merely pointing to a DC with symptoms or manifestations is not sufficient to establish that a disability with the same manifestations exists. 
 
The principles listed below apply when making a determination that pain or a condition result in functional impairment of earning capacity.
Subjective symptoms, such as complaints of pain, are not enough to establish the presence of a disability.  The pain or condition must amount to a functional impairment (i.e., diminish the body’s ability to function).
An individualized assessment, which includes a preliminary evaluation of the degree of impairment, must be undertaken.
The mere existence of pain or a condition is not enough to constitute a disability.  The pain or other condition must impair earning capacity.
Reference:  For more information on the evidentiary standard to demonstrate impairment of earning capacity, see Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet.App. 8 (2020).

V.ii.3.C.2.c.  Impact of Saunders v. Wilkie on Diagnoses of Pain 

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018), overturned the longstanding Court of Veterans Appeals holding in Sanchez-Benitez v. West, 13 Vet.App. 282 (1999) that pain alone, without a diagnosed or identifiable underlying malady or condition, does not in and of itself constitute a disability for which SC may be granted. 
Saunders addresses what a “disability” is for purposes of obtaining SC under 38 U.S.C. 1110.  A separate case, Petitti v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 415 (2015), addresses the appropriate rating under VA regulations for musculoskeletal disabilities already deemed to be service-connected (SC) disabilities. 
Saunders pertains to the issue of entitlement to SC and governs that a claimant’s pain “must amount to a functional impairment of earning capacity” to constitute a disability.  Saunders is applicable for all body systems.  
Petitti pertains to the issue of the disability evaluation assigned for a disability already found to be SC.  Petitti directs that when assigning a disability evaluation, assuming 38 CFR 4.59 and 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5002 or 5003 are for application, “painful, albeit nonlimited, motion” is entitled to a minimum compensable rating per joint.  This holding is applicable to musculoskeletal disabilities. 
The Saunders holding is not a liberalizing rule warranting application of 38 CFR 3.114.  
The Saunders holding is dated April 3, 2018, and applies to all claims or legacy appeals pending or received on or after that date. 
Reference:  For more information on determining when pain results in functional impairment, see
Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 786 (Fed. Cir. 2016)
Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32, 38, 43 (2011), and
Read v. Shinseki, 651 F.3d 1296, 1301 (Fed. Cir. 2011).

V.ii.3.C.2.d.  Impact of Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie on Determinations Regarding Functional Impairment of Earning Capacity 

The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC), in Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet.App. 393 (2020), defined a disability under 38 U.S.C. 1110 as including any condition that results in a functional impairment of earning capacity.  CAVC clarified that this applies more broadly than to just pain. 
CAVC, in Martinez-Boden, also held that a psychiatric condition must have a Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth version (DSM-5) diagnosis to constitute a disability, as 38 CFR 4.125 and 38 CFR 4.130 contain a DSM-5 diagnosis requirement for claimed psychiatric conditions.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed this holding in Martinez-Bodon v. McDonough, 28 F.4th 1241 (2022).  
The Martinez-Bodon holding is not a liberalizing rule warranting application of 38 CFR 3.114.
The Martinez-Bodon holding is dated August 11, 2020, and applies to all claims or legacy appeals pending or received on or after that date.

V.ii.3.C.2.e.  Examples of Diagnosis of Pain 

Example 1:  The Veteran, during a VA examination, reports bilateral knee pain while performing various activities.  The examiner finds no anatomic abnormality, weakness, or reduced range of motion; however, the examiner notes that the Veteran has functional limitations on walking, is unable to stand for more than a few minutes, and sometimes requires use of a cane or brace.  A diagnosis of subjective bilateral knee pain is rendered and the examiner comments that the pain leads to increased absenteeism and impacts the Veteran’s ability to complete daily activities.  Although a current diagnosis is not provided, a current disability under 38 U.S.C. 1110 is established as the pain is shown to result in functional impairment of earning capacity. 
 
Example 2:  The Veteran, during a VA examination, complains of right shoulder pain.  The examiner finds no pain, weakness, or abnormality.  Repetitive motion does not elicit pain, and the examiner concludes that the Veteran would not develop pain during flare-ups or repeated use over time.  The examiner comments that the subjective complaints of right shoulder pain would not impact the Veteran’s ability to perform any type of occupational task.  Although the Veteran’s complaints of right shoulder pain are credible, a current disability under 38 U.S.C. 1110 is not established as the evidence fails to demonstrate that there is any functional impairment of earning capacity due to the subjective right shoulder pain. 
 
Example 3:  During VA examination the Veteran reports experiencing throbbing headaches with visual changes two to three times a week, necessitating lying down for several hours to obtain relief.  The examiner reviewed employment records showing that the Veteran has had to leave work several times over the past few months due to headaches and private medical records showing visits for headaches.  No obvious abnormalities were found.  The examiner diagnosed subjective cephalgia.  The examiner’s assessment was that the cephalgia impacts the Veteran’s ability to perform occupational tasks because the frequent episodes are so painful that the Veteran needs to cease all activity for several hours to obtain relief.  A current disability is demonstrated under 38 U.S.C. 1110.  Although the cephalgia is subjective, the evidence is credible and demonstrates that the cephalgia results in functional impairment of earning capacity. 
 
Example 4:  The Veteran complains of right knee pain during a VA examination.  The examiner finds no anatomic abnormality, weakness, or reduced range of motion of the right knee.  The examiner indicates that flare-ups or repeated use over time would not result in additional functional loss to include pain and loss of motion.  The examiner does not provide any analysis as to whether the right knee pain impacts the Veteran’s ability to perform occupational tasks.  A diagnosis of subjective right knee pain is given.  In this case, the examination report should be returned for the examiner to provide analysis as to whether the right knee pain impacts the Veteran’s ability to perform occupational tasks unless this can be established by other credible evidence of record. 

V.ii.3.C.2.f.  Example of Functional Impairment of Earning Capacity Due to Other Condition 

Example:  The Veteran reported constant shortness of breath during a VA examination.  No rales, rhonchi, wheezing, or diminished breath sounds were shown on examination.  Pulmonary function testing revealed no restriction or obstruction.  Subjective dyspnea was diagnosed.  The examiner commented that while the objective testing was normal, the Veteran’s report of constant shortness of breath is legitimate and would be expected to cause limitations in any occupation that would require only minimal exertion.  A current disability is shown under 38 U.S.C. 1110.  Although the Veteran’s report of dyspnea is subjective, it is shown to be credible and the condition is productive of functional impairment of earning capacity. 

 
3.  Diagnoses Associated With Obesity

Introduction

This topic includes policies and procedures for claims for compensation associated with obesity, including
considering direct SC for obesity
considering secondary SC for obesity
reasonably raised claims for secondary SC associated with obesity, and
examples of obesity determinations.

Change Date

November 8, 2021

V.ii.3.C.3.a.  Considering Direct SC for Obesity

Obesity per se is not a disease or injury for the purposes of 38 U.S.C 1110 and 38 U.S.C. 1131 and therefore may not be SC on a direct basis. 
 
Obesity cannot qualify as an in-service event because it occurs over time and is based on various external and internal factors, as opposed to being a discrete incident or occurrence, or a series of discrete incidents or occurrences.
 
References:  For more information on 
considering SC for obesity, see VAOPGCPREC 1-2017, and
whether CAVC has jurisdiction to review Board of Veterans’ Appeals decisions that obesity and dysmetabolic syndrome are not disabilities for the purposes of 38 U.S.C. 1110, see Larson v. McDonough, 10 F.4th 1325 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

V.ii.3.C.3.b.  Considering Secondary SC for Obesity

Obesity per se is not a “disability” for the purposes of SC under 38 CFR 3.310 for secondary SC.  If obesity resulting from an SC disease or injury is found to produce impairment beyond that contemplated by the applicable provisions of the rating schedule, consider an extra-schedular rating under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) for SC based on that impairment.
 
Obesity may be an intermediate step between an SC disability and a current disability that may be SC on a secondary basis under 38 CFR 3.310(a) or on the basis of aggravation under 38 CFR 3.310(b).
 
To determine whether obesity is an intermediate step between an SC disability and the development of a current disability that may be SC on a secondary basis, including by aggravation, the following criteria must all be satisfied:
the SC disability must have caused the Veteran to become obese
the obesity as a result of the SC disability must have been a substantial factor in 
causing the claimed disability, or
aggravating the claimed disability, and
the claimed disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the SC disability.
Example:  A Veteran claims secondary SC for hypertension asserting that inability to exercise from SC back symptoms caused obesity leading to hypertension.  To grant SC, an adjudicator would have to resolve the following issues: (1) whether the SC back disability caused the Veteran to become obese; (2) if so, whether the obesity as a result of the SC disability was a substantial factor in causing hypertension; and (3) whether the hypertension would not have occurred but for obesity cause by the SC back disability.  If these questions are answered in the affirmative, the hypertension may be SC on a secondary basis. 
 
References:  For more information on
considering SC for obesity, see VAOPGCPREC 1-2017
considering SC based on aggravation of obesity, see Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet.App. 300 (2020), and
extra-schedular consideration, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.3.

V.ii.3.C.3.c.  Reasonably Raised Claims for Secondary SC Associated With Obesity

Obesity as an intermediate step for secondary SC is only reasonably raised when there is evidence in the record that draws an association or suggests a relationship between the Veteran’s obesity, or weight gain resulting in obesity, and an SC disability.  Incidental references to a Veteran’s weight or weight gain are not sufficient to reasonably raise the issue. 
 
Reference:  For more information on identifying reasonably raised claims for SC for obesity, see Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet.App. 241 (2021).

V.ii.3.C.3.d.  Examples of Obesity Determinations

Extra-Schedular Evaluation Example:  A Veteran is SC for rheumatoid arthritis with a 40-percent evaluation and is shown to be unable to exercise due to the debilitating nature of the disease.  Competent medical evidence shows that the Veteran developed obesity as a result of the inability to exercise and the obesity results in additional pain, weakness, and instability of the joints that produces functional loss beyond that shown to solely result from the rheumatoid arthritis.  The evidence does not support a higher schedular evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5002 or a higher evaluation based on separate evaluation of the affected joints.
 
In view of the record showing that obesity results from the SC rheumatoid arthritis and produces impairment beyond that contemplated by the regular rating criteria, a determination should be rendered as to whether referral for consideration of an extra-schedular evaluation under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) is warranted. 
 
Intermediate Step Example:  The Veteran’s SC psoriasis is manifested by constant flare-ups that require near continuous treatment with Prednisone for management.  The near continuous use of Prednisone on a long-term basis resulted in obesity, which was medically shown to lead to the development of coronary artery disease (CAD).  Based on the evidence, the obesity is shown to be an intermediate step between the SC psoriasis and CAD, which satisfies the proximate cause requirement under 38 CFR 3.310(a) to establish SC for CAD on a secondary basis. 
 
Reference:  For more information on extra-schedular evaluations, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.3.

 
4.  Claims Involving Contentions of Infertility

Introduction

This topic includes information on claims involving contentions of infertility, including
the definition of infertility
rating a claim for a disability resulting in infertility
special monthly compensation (SMC) associated with SC conditions resulting in infertility, and
examples involving infertility.

Change Date

September 30, 2025

V.ii.3.C.4.a.  Definition: Infertility

Infertility, for the purpose of SC disability benefits, is the inability to successfully procreate (with or without medical intervention), as a result of a Veteran’s SC injury or disease. 

V.ii.3.C.4.b.  Rating a Claim for a Disability Resulting in Infertility

Do not establish SC for “infertility” as a stand-alone condition for compensation purposes.  Instead, a claim for infertility should be accepted as a claim for the underlying injury or disease causing infertility and rated as such.
Notes:
VA decision makers are not permitted to draw medical conclusions about the existence of infertility or an underlying cause of infertility in the absence of supportive medical evidence in the record.  As noted in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.c, only competent medical evidence can establish diagnosis or etiology.  M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.3.f, adds that medical conclusions must be supported by evidence in the claims folder.
If a VA examination shows a diagnosis of “infertility” but does not identify an underlying disease or injury causing infertility, return the examination for clarification, as discussed in 21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C. 
If after a thorough review of both medical and lay evidence an underlying disease or injury is not identified as a cause for the claimed infertility, follow the instructions in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.h.
References:  For more information on
prostate cancer, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.3.c and d
erectile dysfunction, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.4
hydrocele or varicocele, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.5.c
female sexual arousal disorder (FSAD), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.1.e
disorders of menstruation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.2.a
malignant neoplasms of the gynecological system, see  M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.2.c, and
elective procedures involving the reproductive system, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.1.c.

V.ii.3.C.4.c.  SMC Associated With SC Conditions Resulting in Infertility

When SC is granted for a condition resulting in infertility, award special monthly compensation (SMC) based on anatomical loss or loss of use (LOU) of a creative organ.
Reference:  For more information on entitlement to SMC (k) for anatomical loss or LOU of a creative organ, see
38 CFR 3.350(a)
38 CFR 4.116, Note 2
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.a-d
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.4 and 5, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart III, 8.A.

V.ii.3.C.4.d.  Examples Involving Infertility

Example 1:  A Veteran files a claim for SC for “infertility.”  The evidence shows a diagnosis of endometriosis beginning in service, with treatment for endometriosis and infertility treatments post-service.  VA examination diagnoses endometriosis with resultant infertility.  Grant SC for endometriosis, the underlying disease that causes the infertility.  Do not establish SC for “infertility.”  Award SMC based on LOU of a creative organ.
Example 2:  A Veteran who is SC for type 2 diabetes mellitus, files a claim for “infertility.”  The evidence shows that after SC was established, the Veteran developed erectile dysfunction related to the diabetes.  No worsening of the underlying diabetic process is claimed or shown by the evidence.  Grant SC for erectile dysfunction as a complication of type 2 diabetes mellitus, the underlying injury or disease that causes the infertility.  Do not establish SC for “infertility.”  Award SMC based on LOU of a creative organ.
Example 3:  A Veteran files a claim for SC of “infertility” but does not claim or identify any underlying cause of infertility and is not SC for any disabilities that could account for infertility.  A thorough review of the evidence does not identify an underlying injury or disease causing infertility.  The claims processor attempts to contact the Veteran for clarification of the claim as outlined in M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.c, but is unsuccessful.  Deny SC for infertility.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 3, Section D - Evaluating Disabilities
Article ID: 554400000180489
Updated Oct 24, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Selecting Diagnostic Codes (DCs)
2
Determining a Disability Evaluation Based on Rating Schedule Criteria
3
Extra-schedular Evaluations
4
Permanent and Total (P&T) Evaluations
5
Principles of Disability Evaluation for Specific Conditions


1.  Selecting DCs
  

Introduction

This topic includes information to supplement the regulatory provisions for selection of  DCs to evaluate disabilities in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Schedule for Rating Disabilities, including
choosing from multiple possible DCs
use of hyphenated DCs
using analogous codes
when to avoid rating by analogy
impact of a change in DC, and
handling a change in diagnosis.

Change Date

May 29, 2025

V.ii.3.D.1.a.  Choosing From Multiple Possible DCs 

Diagnostic Codes (DCs) must be carefully selected and reasons for selection given if two or more are applicable.  When multiple DCs apply to a given disability, consider
whether separate evaluations are warranted, and/or
which DC will result in the most advantageous outcome for the claimant.
References:  For more information on
determining whether separate evaluations are warranted, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b, and
38 CFR 4.14
providing the reason for selection of a DC in the rating decision, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A.6.B, and
Suttman v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 127 (1993), and
procedures for entering DCs in the Veterans Benefits Management System-Rating (VBMS-R), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.2.

V.ii.3.D.1.b.  Use of Hyphenated DCs 

Hyphenated DCs may be utilized for diseases or injuries.  The use of a hyphenated DC is not intended to substitute for appropriate assignment of separate evaluations for different disabilities arising from a single injury. 
 
References:  For more information on the
use of hyphenated DCs, see
38 CFR 4.27
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.2.c and d, and
Tropf v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 317 (2006)
use of hyphenated DCs for qualifying disabilities associated with service in Southwest Asia, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart ii, 1.C.2.b, and
assignment of separate evaluations for individual manifestations of a disease or injury, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b, and
Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994). 

V.ii.3.D.1.c.  Using Analogous Codes

Use analogous codes to evaluate disabilities not listed in 38 CFR Part 4, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Schedule for Rating Disabilities, based on
function(s) affected
anatomical location, and
symptomatology.
These factors must be discussed in the rating decision Narrative when a disability is evaluated under an analogous DC. 
When a claimant (or representative) requests a disability be evaluated under a specific DC and the claims processor chooses to evaluate the disability under an alternative DC, the rating decision Narrative must explain (in sufficient detail) why the particular analogous DC was selected and why the requested DC was not appropriate to evaluate the Veteran’s disability.
In cases where there is no other reasonable alternative DC for analogous purposes, other than the selected analogous DC, the claims processor should indicate this in the Narrative.
References:  For more information on analogous ratings, see
38 CFR 4.20
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.2
Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet.App. 345 (1992), and
Webb v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 1377 (Fed.Cir. 2023).

V.ii.3.D.1.d.  When to Avoid Rating by Analogy 

When a condition is specifically listed in the rating schedule, it may not be rated by analogy.
 
When there is a diagnosis of two separate conditions, apply the DC(s) that specifically pertains to the listed conditions and determine the appropriate disability evaluations. 
 
Reference:  For more information on analogous ratings, see Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 333 (2015).

V.ii.3.D.1.e.  Impact of a Change in DC

Service connection (SC) of a disability is not severed when the site of a disability or the DC associated with it is corrected to more accurately determine the benefit to which a Veteran may be entitled.  The diagnosis or site of the existing service-connected (SC) condition may be corrected to accurately reflect the actual anatomical location of the injury or disease resulting in the Veteran’s disability, provided the redesignation does not result in severance of SC for the disability in question.
 
However, a change in DC cannot serve to reduce a protected disability evaluation where the symptoms upon which the evaluation was based are no longer present. 
 
A change of diagnosis shown on examination or in other medical evidence must be reconciled to determine whether the underlying disability is the same condition or a progression of the condition that was previously diagnosed under a different diagnosis or whether a new disability, unrelated to the prior diagnosis, is being addressed.
 
Example 1:  A Veteran is SC for gunshot wound (GSW) of the right thigh muscle group (MG) XIII under 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5313 with a 10-percent evaluation assigned based on moderate impairment.  Subsequent evidence showed that the GSW actually impacted only MG XV, which is evaluated under 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5315 and that there was never an injury to or impairment of MG XIII.  In this situation, since the correction of DC serves only to correct the site of the impairment and does not serve to effectively sever SC for an otherwise properly established disability, the change in DC is warranted.
 
Example 2:  A Veteran is SC under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257 for mild instability of the left knee shown on examination.  The evaluation has been in place for over 20 years and is protected under 38 CFR 3.957.  A claim for increase is received.  The resultant examination shows no instability of the left knee but does show arthritis and pain related to the SC injury.  In this situation, the 10-percent evaluation assigned under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257 may not be reduced or eliminated.  However, since there are separately compensable disabilities shown in the record, a separate evaluation for arthritis may be assigned under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010.
 
References:  For more information on
the applicability of protection for
an SC evaluation under 38 CFR 3.951 when
a DC is changed, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.1.k, and
the condition has been evaluated with a single disability evaluation which is now being replaced by separate evaluation, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.1.l, and
SC under 38 CFR 3.957 when a DC is being changed or the site of a disability is being corrected, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.2.d
handling examination reports reflecting a change or conflict in diagnoses, see
38 CFR 4.2, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C
determining whether a change in DC effectively results in severance of SC, see
VAOPGCPREC 50-1991
Read v. Shinseki, 651 F.3d 1296 (2011), and
Murray v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 420 (2011). 

V.ii.3.D.1.f.  Handling a Change in Diagnosis 

38 CFR 4.13 directs that evidence suggesting a change in the diagnosis of an SC disability must be reviewed with a goal of reconciling the discrepancy and maintaining SC for the disability, where possible.  Reconciliation is necessary to ensure 
accuracy of the diagnosis, and
that the proper disability has been examined and is being evaluated.
Refer to the table below for actions to take when a change in diagnosis of an SC disability is shown.
 
If the ...
Then ...
change in diagnosis is shown on a VA examination and the examiner does not reconcile the change in diagnosis
return the examination report for clarification as directed at M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.
change in diagnosis is shown in outpatient treatment records or other medical evidence
request a medical opinion and examination (if warranted) to reconcile the change in diagnosis.
medical evidence definitively shows that the diagnosis has changed and that the prior diagnosis was clearly erroneous
follow the procedures for severance of SC as directed at M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.B.
  
Reference:  For more information on special procedures for handling severance of SC for disabilities granted under 38 CFR 3.317, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart ii, 1.C.2.e and f.
medical evidence shows that the change in diagnosis represents a progression of the SC disability
update the diagnosis to reflect the current diagnosis as well as the historical diagnosis. 
  
Example:  right knee arthritis (previously diagnosed as strain)
medical evidence shows that the change in diagnosis represents a separate disability and reflects that the SC disability still exists
obtain adequate evidence to evaluate the SC disability and separate the symptoms of the SC disability from the non-service-connected (NSC) disability. 
  
Reference:  For more information on assigning a disability evaluation when the symptoms of an SC and NSC disability cannot be separated, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.c.


2.  Determining a Disability Evaluation Based on Rating Schedule Criteria

Introduction

This topic includes general principles for determining a disability evaluation based on rating schedule criteria, including
relationships within evaluation criteria
separating individual findings and pyramiding
evaluating symptoms of SC and NSC disabilities that cannot be separated
considering rating criteria that utilize “such as”
choosing between two levels of evaluation
assignment of zero-percent evaluations
assigning a 10-percent evaluation for multiple noncompensable SC disabilities
determining the retroactive applicability of a new statute or regulation
effect of rating schedule readjustment
assigning staged ratings, and
use of the Evaluation Builder.

Change Date

September 15, 2021

V.ii.3.D.2.a.  Relationships Within Evaluation Criteria 

In determining which fact findings are required to make a legal conclusion, generally if regulatory criteria are
conjunctive (separated by “and”), all of the conjoined criteria must be met for the legal standard of entitlement to be met, or 
disjunctive (separated by “or”), any one of the alternative criteria will support entitlement to the benefit. 
The manner in which evaluation criteria relate to the lower and higher evaluation criteria within the same DC is also relevant when assigning evaluations. 
Cumulative rating criteria are characterized by the lower evaluations building upon each other.
Successive rating criteria are a type of cumulative criteria characterized by higher evaluations for increased duration of symptoms.
Variable rating criteria are characterized by a lack of relationship between one set of evaluation criteria to the higher or lower evaluation criteria for the same DC.  In variable rating criteria, symptoms could potentially meet the criteria required for a higher evaluation without satisfying the criteria for a lesser evaluation. 
Important: 
Conjunctive language is always subject to the reasonable doubt principles in 38 CFR 3.102 when the evidence is in relative equipoise or when there is a question regarding degree of disability.
38 CFR 4.21 does not apply to conjunctive rating criteria. 
38 CFR 4.7 is an important consideration when evaluating a disability using variable rating criteria. 
References:  For more information on
the application of 
the rating schedule, see 38 CFR 4.21, and
38 CFR 4.7 in variable rating criteria, see Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet.App. 152 (2009), and
utilizing successive rating criteria, see Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 360 (2007).    

V.ii.3.D.2.b.  Separating Individual Findings and Pyramiding

Do not separate individual findings when these findings, in their entirety, constitute one disability.  This is
fundamental to the proper evaluation of a disability, and
consistent with the prohibition against pyramiding under 38 CFR 4.14.
Note:  Pyramiding is rating the same physical manifestations of a disability under two separate DCs.  Separate evaluations are warranted where none of the symptomatology for any one condition duplicates or overlaps another (Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259, 261-62 (1994)).
 
Example 1:  A disability of a tibia with malunion, limitation of dorsiflexion, eversion, inversion, and traumatic arthritis of the ankle would be evaluated under one DC, 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5262, in accordance with the effect upon ankle function, with no separate evaluation for the limitation of motion or traumatic arthritis.
 
Example 2:  A shoulder disability manifest as limitation of motion of the arm is entitled to a single rating under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201, regardless of how many planes of motion are affected.
  
Example 3:  Instability of the knee (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257) may be evaluated separately from limited motion of the knee due to arthritis (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003).
 
Reference:  For more information on separating individual findings for knee disabilities, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.4
VAOPGCPREC 23-1997, and
VAOPGCPREC 9-1998.

V.ii.3.D.2.c.  Evaluating Symptoms of SC and NSC Disabilities That Cannot Be Separated

If it is not possible to separate the effects of an NSC condition from those of an SC condition, reasonable doubt, under 38 CFR 3.102, should be resolved in the Veteran’s favor with regard to whether certain signs and symptoms can be attributed to the SC condition.
 
When evaluating an SC disability for rating purposes, if it is not possible to differentiate the Veteran’s symptoms from an SC and NSC disability, all symptoms should be deemed related to the SC disability and rated accordingly. 
 
Important: 
Although the combined symptoms of the SC and NSC disabilities are used to support the assigned disability evaluation, the NSC disability is not considered SC. 
The decision that the symptoms of the SC and NSC disabilities cannot be separated is a medical determination.  When the record is not clear as to whether the symptoms can be separated, obtain a medical opinion for clarification.
References:  For more information on
evaluating symptoms of SC and NSC disabilities that 
cannot be separated, see Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet.App. 181 (1998), and
can be separated, see Langdon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet.App. 291 (2020)
evidence requiring further development, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.B, and
returning examination reports for clarification, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.

V.ii.3.D.2.d.  Considering Rating Criteria That Utilize “Such As” 

The use of the phrase “such symptoms as,” or a similar phrase, followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the variety of symptoms contemplated for each rating, and permits consideration of other symptoms, particular to each Veteran and condition.
Reference:  For more information on the use of the term “such symptoms as” in the schedule of ratings for mental disorders, see Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet.App. 436 (2002). 

V.ii.3.D.2.e.  Choosing Between Two Levels of Evaluation  

38 CFR 4.7 provides that where there is a question upon review of the evidence as to which of two evaluations shall be assigned, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.
 
Important:  38 CFR 4.7 does not preclude application of the reasonable doubt doctrine.  When the decision maker concludes that the facts equally (or approximately equally) support two levels of evaluation such that each is as likely as not warranted, the higher evaluation will be awarded.  
 
Reference:  For more information on the application of variable, cumulative, and successive rating criteria and when 38 CFR 4.7 applies, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.a. 

V.ii.3.D.2.f. Assignment of Zero-Percent Evaluations

In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero-percent evaluation for a DC, a zero-percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.
Exception:  Never assign a zero-percent evaluation to a condition for which the rating schedule directs a prescribed, schedular minimum rating.  Prescribed, schedular minimum ratings, in this context as well as that of M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.F.1.a and 38 CFR 3.327(b), refer exclusively to instances in which the rating schedule requires assignment of a certain compensable evaluation once the underlying disability manifests or exists in the manner described.  Examples include
38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8009, which requires that residuals of brain vessel hemorrhage be assigned a minimum rating of 10 percent
38 CFR 4.104, DC 7019, which requires that residuals of cardiac transplantation be assigned a minimum rating of 30 percent, and
38 CFR 4.116, DC 7617, which requires that postoperative removal of the uterus and both ovaries be assigned a minimum rating of 50 percent.
Reference:  For more information on assignment of zero-percent evaluations, see 38 CFR 4.31.   

V.ii.3.D.2.g.  Assigning a 10-Percent Evaluation for Multiple Noncompensable SC Disabilities

Under 38 CFR 3.324, a single 10-percent evaluation may be assigned when all of the following criteria are met: 
a Veteran is suffering from two or more separate permanent noncompensable SC disabilities
there are no other compensable SC disabilities, and
the SC disabilities clearly interfere with normal employability. 
Notes: 
Payment of compensation at the 10-percent rate cannot be made in combination with any other compensable disability evaluation.   
When entitlement to a 10-percent rating has been established but a subsequent rating decision establishes entitlement to a compensable evaluation for an SC disability, the grant of the compensable SC evaluation is considered the greater benefit.  It is unnecessary to close out the past grant of entitlement under 38 CFR 3.324, as VBMS recognizes payment for the compensable disability as the greater benefit.
Reference:  For more information on when to put into issue in a rating decision and decide entitlement to a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 3.324, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.b.

V.ii.3.D.2.h.  Determining the Retroactive Applicability of a New Statute or Regulation 

The provisions of a statutory or regulatory change to rating schedule criteria for evaluating disabilities are generally not retroactive unless retroactive applicability is specifically directed.  When a change that revises the rating schedule’s evaluation criteria does not specify the intent for retroactive application, assume that the new criteria do not apply prior to the effective date of the corresponding regulatory change.
 
Note:  For claims pending on the date that a rating schedule provision is changed, it is usually appropriate to apply the
old regulation in assigning disability evaluations for periods that precede the date of the change, and
new regulation in evaluating a disability for any period that begins on or after the date of the change.  After the effective date of the regulation change
a higher evaluation must be based on the new regulation, but
the new regulatory criteria cannot be applied to reduce an evaluation unless actual improvement has occurred as discussed in 38 CFR 3.951(a) and M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.i.
 References:  For more information on
protection of a disability rating based on adjustment to the rating schedule, see 38 CFR 3.951(a)
determining
the retroactive applicability of a new statute or regulation, see VAOPGCPREC 7-2003, and
effective dates that are based on a change of law or regulation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6, and
assigning staged ratings, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.j.

V.ii.3.D.2.i.  Effect of Rating Schedule Readjustment

When the rating schedule is readjusted, in no event shall the readjustment cause a Veteran’s disability evaluation in effect on the effective date of the readjustment to be reduced unless an improvement in the disability is shown to have occurred, even if the combined evaluation is not reduced, as indicated in VAOPGCPREC 19-1992 and 38 U.S.C. 1155.
 
This precedent opinion also provides that when a Veteran is receiving the minimum evaluation for a condition at the time the rating schedule is revised, and the condition subsequently undergoes an exacerbation resulting in a higher evaluation, if the condition returns to the same, symptom-free status it was in at the time of the rating schedule change, a noncompensable evaluation under the new criteria will be assigned.
 
Note:  The February 3, 1988, revision of criteria for rating psychiatric disorders is considered a liberalizing law/VA issue as indicated in Sabol v. Derwinski, U.S. Vet.App. No. 90-1123 (1992), 38 U.S.C. 5110(g), 38 CFR 3.114, and VAOPGCPREC 19-1992.
 
Reference:  For more information on protection and rating schedule changes, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.4.

V.ii.3.D.2.j.  Assigning Staged Ratings

The term staged rating refers to the assignment of separate ratings for separate periods of time based on the facts found.
  
38 CFR 3.105(e) does not apply to a staged rating.  Additionally, 38 CFR 3.105(e)is inapplicable to disabilities rated under DCs containing a note that “any change in evaluation . . . shall be subject to the provisions of 38 CFR 3.105(e)” if the reduction is part of a staged rating assigned in the grant of an original claim for such disability.
  
Reference:  For more information on assigning staged ratings, see
Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet.App. 119 (1999)
Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet.App. 505 (2007)
Tatum v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App. 139 (2010), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.A.1.e.

V.ii.3.D.2.k.  Use of the Evaluation Builder

Use of the Evaluation Builder in assigning disability evaluations in claims for compensation is mandatory.  The Evaluation Builder is programmed to represent accurate policy and procedure and should not be overridden unless specific authorization exists for doing so.
 
When a change in policy or procedure is officially issued in either regulatory, policy, or procedural guidance and causes the Evaluation Builder to generate inaccurate results for a temporary period of time until updates can be made, decision makers are required to override the Evaluation Builder or use appropriate workarounds so that disabilities are accurately evaluated in accordance with published guidance.  In these situations, decision makers will be directed to utilize overrides or workarounds. 

 
3.  Extra-Schedular Consideration
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about extra-schedular consideration, including
extra-schedular evaluations in compensation claims
approving extra-schedular evaluation in compensation claims
when to submit compensation claims for extra-schedular consideration
extra-schedular evaluations under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1)
procedure for referring claims for extra-schedular consideration
extra-schedular consideration in pension claims, and
exhibit of 
38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) referral memorandum, and
38 CFR 4.16(b) referral memorandum.

Change Date

September 15, 2021

V.ii.3.D.3.a.  Extra-Schedular Evaluations in Compensation Claims

Consider the issue of entitlement to an extra-schedular evaluation in compensation claims under
38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) only where
the issue is expressly raised by the Veteran, or
there is evidence of exceptional or unusual circumstances indicating that the rating schedule may be inadequate to compensate for the average impairment of earning capacity due to disability (for example, marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization), and
38 CFR 4.16(b) whenever
the issue is expressly stated
there is evidence that the Veteran may be unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation because of an SC disability, and
total disability based on individual unemployability (IU) cannot be awarded on a schedular basis.
Important:  
If the Veteran explicitly raises the issue of extra-schedular entitlement, but the general criteria for referring the claim to Compensation Service are not met, the decision and decision notice must include an explanation of that determination.
In the interest of maximizing available benefit entitlement in all cases, regional offices (ROs) must explore and exhaust all possible schedular rating methods and alternatives, to include the following, before referring a claim to Compensation Service for extra-schedular consideration:
analogous ratings
assignment of the higher of two potentially applicable evaluations under 38 CFR 4.7
resolution of reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant under 38 CFR 4.3
permissible means of evaluating SC disabilities under multiple separate DC criteria without pyramiding, and/or
awards of
IU benefits, and/or
special monthly compensation (SMC).
References:  For more information on 
total disability claims, see
VAOGCPREC 6-1996
Floyd v. Brown, 9 Vet.App. 88 (1996), and
Bagwell v. Brown, 9 Vet.App. 337 (1996)
extra-schedular evaluations under
38 CFR 3.321(b)(1), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.3.d, and
38 CFR 4.16(b), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4.b, and
the threshold analysis involved in determining propriety of extra-schedular rating referrals, see Morgan v. Wilkie, 31 Vet.App. 162 (2019).

V.ii.3.D.3.b.  Approving Extra-Schedular Evaluations in Compensation Claims

Only the Director of the Compensation Service (214D) may approve extra-schedular evaluations in compensation claims submitted under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1)and 38 CFR 4.16(b).

V.ii.3.D.3.c.  When to Submit Compensation Claims for Extra-Schedular Consideration

Submit compensation claims to Compensation Service for extra-schedular consideration under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) or 38 CFR 4.16(b) if a(n)
unusual or exceptional disability picture, with such related factors as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization, renders the schedular evaluation inadequate for an individual disability, or
total rating cannot be assigned solely because
the minimum schedular requirements of 38 CFR 4.16 are not met, and
a total rating is considered warranted.
Important:  ROs are only required to refer claims for extra-schedular consideration when that issue, whether or not argued by the claimant, is reasonably substantiated by the evidence of record.
References:  For more information on﻿
the procedure for referring claims to Compensation Service for extra-schedular consideration, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.3.d, and
extra-schedular consideration, see
Long v. Wilkie, 33 Vet.App. 167 (2020)
King v. Shulkin, 29 Vet.App. 174 (2017) 
Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 484 (2016)
Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet.App. 111 (2008), and
Anderson v. Shinseki, 22 Vet.App. 423 (2009).

V.ii.3.D.3.d.Extra-Schedular Evaluations Under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) 

38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) provides for referral for extra-schedular consideration based on the impact of a single disability.
Refer a claim to the Compensation Service for a determination on whether an extra-schedular rating may be assigned when both of the following criteria are met:
the established schedular criteria are inadequate to describe the severity and symptoms of the claimant’s disability, and
there are other indications of an exceptional or unusual disability picture, such as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization.
Notes:  
Do not routinely refer a claimant’s request for extra-schedular consideration to Compensation Service.  When a claimant requests extra-schedular consideration for an SC disability, only refer the claim if the referral criteria specified above are met.
Do not dismiss the potential for extra-schedular referral based solely on the availability of a higher schedular disability evaluation.  The availability of a higher schedular rating is irrelevant in determining whether a request for extra-schedular evaluation is warranted unless the disability is evaluated as 100-percent disabling.  A disability may be considered for extra-schedular evaluation when less than the maximum available schedular evaluation is assigned as long as all other criteria for referral, as discussed above, have been met.
When the schedular rating criteria contemplates the symptoms necessitating the use of assistive devices as well as the severity of those symptoms, referral for extra-schedular consideration under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) is not warranted based solely on the use of assistive devices.
References:  For more information on
when to address the issue of entitlement to an extra-schedular evaluation under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) in a rating decision, see VAOPGCPREC 6-1996, and
the relevance of the use of assistive devices in extra-schedular consideration, see Spellers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet.App. 211 (2008).

V.ii.3.D.3.e.  Procedure for Referring Claims for Extra-Schedular Consideration

Follow the steps in the table below when referring claims for extra-schedular consideration under either 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) or 38 CFR 4.16(b). 
 
Step
Action
1
Complete the appropriate memorandum as shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.3.g or h.
 
Note:  When referring a claim to Compensation Service for consideration of both 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) or 38 CFR 4.16(b), the request may be submitted under the same memo as long as the memo fully discusses both extra-schedular provisions and provides recommendations for both.
2
Obtain the required signatures on VA Form 21-0961, Rating Decision/Administrative Decision/Formal Finding/Statement of the Case (SOC)/Supplemental Statement of the Case (SSOC) (Electronic Signatures).
3
Upload the memorandum and all other relevant documents to the Veteran’s electronic claims folder.
4
Use the table below to refer the claim to Compensation Service for extra-schedular consideration.
 
If the claim is …
Then …
processed in the National Work Queue (NWQ) environment
assign the Compensation Service Review – Extraschedular special issue indicator to the relevant contention(s), and Compensation Service Case Reviewtracked item in accordance with the NWQ Phase 1 &2 Playbook to ensure proper routing to Compensation Service.
not processed in the NWQ environment
assign the
Compensation Service Review – Extraschedular special issue indicator to the relevant contention(s), and
Compensation Service Case Review tracked item, and
manually broker the end product (EP) to Compensation Service (Washington DC).
Reference:  For more information on manually brokering EPs, see the VBMS Core User Guide.
 
 
Reference:  For more information on assigning special issue indicators and tracked items, see
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.F, and
the VBMS Core User Guide.

V.ii.3.D.3.f.  Extra-Schedular Consideration in Pension Claims

In pension claims, consider the issue of entitlement to an extra-schedular evaluation under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(2) whenever a Veteran fails to meet the schedular requirements for permanent and total (P&T) disability.  If approval is recommended, forward the rating decision and claims folder to the Veterans Service Center Manager, Pension Management Center Manager, or designee for signature.

V.ii.3.D.3.g.  Exhibit 1:  38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) Referral Memorandum

This exhibit contains a sample of the memorandum completed for 38 CFR 3.321(b)(1) referrals. 
  
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
[RO Name
 RO Address]
 
[Date]
 
Director                                                           In Rely Refer To:
Compensation Service (214D)                         [RO #]
Department of Veterans Affairs                        [File Number]
Central Office                                                   [Veteran’s Name]
810 Vermont Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20420
 
SUBJECT:  Administrative Review for Entitlement to Increased Evaluation in Accordance with 38 CFR § 3.321(b)(1)
 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION:  [List service information, such as branch, dates, and place(s) of service.]
 
STATEMENT OF ISSUE:  [State specific review requested, including any relevant time period and whether the issue is part of a Board of Veterans’ Appeals (BVA) remand.]
 
Example:  Review for entitlement to an increased evaluation on an extra-schedular basis for bilateral hearing loss.   
 
EVIDENCE:  [List the evidence used for this review.]
 
Example:
Rating decision dated August 1, 2008
BVA decision/remand dated November 1, 2015
VA examinations dated June 7, 2008, July 10, 2010, September 12, 2015, and June 20, 2016 
DISCUSSION:  [Discuss medical evidence in detail for each SC disability related to the request for all pertinent time periods, to include medical evidence found within the file and the BVA remand.]
 
Example:  
 
Service connection has been established for bilateral hearing loss.  This condition has been evaluated at zero percent disabling since January 6, 2008.  The Veteran is requesting an increased evaluation for this condition. BVA remanded this issue on November 1, 2015, and directed that the case be referred for consideration of entitlement to an increased evaluation on an extra-schedular basis from January 6, 2008, to present.  
 
VA examinations dated June 7, 2008, July 10, 2010, and September 12, 2015, document that the Veteran’s hearing loss has been appropriately evaluated at zero percent disabling for the time period of this review.  Speech recognition scores were 96% for the right ear and 94% for the left ear.     
 
On June 20, 2016, another examination was performed.  Testing revealed a slight deterioration in the bilateral hearing loss; however this change is not sufficient to warrant an increased evaluation on a schedular basis.  Speech recognition scores remained at previous levels.  The examiner stated that the Veteran’s hearing loss would not preclude employment.  The examiner further stated that the Veteran would have some difficulty working in situations with a lot of background noise.
 
Evidence shows that the Veteran attended college for two years and worked as an engineer following separation from service.  He retired from this position in January of 2012, after 23 years.  Evidence does not show that the bilateral hearing loss interfered with employment.  
 
Extra-schedular evaluations are assigned in cases where an exceptional or unusual disability picture is presented with such related factors as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization that renders application of regular rating schedular standards impractical. No unusual or exceptional disability pattern has been demonstrated that would render application of the regular rating criteria as impractical.  The evidentiary record does not demonstrate that the symptomatology consistently associated with the service-connected bilateral hearing loss supports an increased evaluation on a schedular or extra-schedular basis for any time period.
 
RECOMMENDATION:  [Provide a recommendation, to include an effective date, if applicable.]
 
Example:  Deny an increased evaluation on an extra-schedular basis for bilateral hearing loss.
 
SIGNATURES:  [Document signatures on VA Form 21-0961 by following procedures in M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.C.3.e.]


V.ii.3.D.3.h.  Exhibit 2:  38 CFR 4.16(b) Referral Memorandum

This exhibit contains a sample of the memorandum completed for 38 CFR 4.16(b)referrals. 
  
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
[RO Name
RO Address]
 
[Date]
 
Director                                                           In Rely Refer To:
Compensation Service (214D)                          [RO #]
Department of Veterans Affairs                        [File Number]
Central Office                                                   [Veteran’s Name]
 
810 Vermont Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20420
 
SUBJECT:  Administrative Review for Entitlement to Total Disability Rating Based on Individual Unemployability (TDIU) in Accordance with 38 CFR 4.16(b)
 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION:  [List service information, such as branch, dates, and place(s) of service.] 
 
STATEMENT OF ISSUE:  [State specific review requested, including any relevant time period and whether the issue is part of a BVA remand.]
 
Example:  Review for entitlement to TDIU benefits on an extra-schedular basis for the period June 20, 2016, to May 1, 2017.  
 
EVIDENCE:  [List the evidence used for this review]
 
Example:
Rating decision dated April 15, 2016
BVA remand dated June 1, 2017
VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, received January 12, 2016
Transcript of hearing, dated May 19, 2017
VA examinations dated December 2012, March 2014, and May 2016
Social Security Administration (SSA) disability transmittal sheet, dated January 30, 2016 
DISCUSSION:  [Discuss medical evidence in detail for each SC disability related to the request for all pertinent time periods, to include medical evidence found within the file and the BVA remand.]
 
Example:
 
Service connection has been established for three conditions.  Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was evaluated at 30 percent disabling effective January 2, 2013, and increased to 50 percent disabling effective January 3, 2016; arthritis of the right knee has been evaluated at 10 percent disabling since June 5, 2010, and bilateral hearing loss has been evaluated at zero percent disabling since June 5, 2010.  The combined evaluation for compensation was 10 percent effective June 5, 2010; 40 percent effective January 2, 2013, and 60 percent effective January 3, 2016.  BVA remanded this issue on January 1, 2017, and directed that the case be referred for entitlement to IU benefits on an extra-schedular basis from January 2, 2013, to present date.  
 
Evidence from SSA shows that the Veteran was found to be entitled to SSA disability benefits in June of 2013.  The primary condition utilized to make that decision was disorders of the spine, and the secondary condition was disorders of the knee.  
 
Evidence shows that the Veteran attended college for four years and worked as an automobile salesperson following separation from service.  He retired from this position in January of 2012, after 26 years.  Evidence does not show that the service-connected conditions interfered with employment.  
 
VA psychiatric examinations performed in December of 2012, March of 2014, and May of 2016, demonstrate that the Veteran’s PTSD has deteriorated since 2013.  The Veteran has never been hospitalized for PTSD, and records show no therapy sessions prior to January of 2016.  The Veteran took prescription medication prescribed by his family doctor until December of 2015, when he first started treatment with a psychiatrist.  Evidence shows no hallucinations, delusions, or suicidal or homicidal ideations at any time.  The Veteran’s depression and anxiety (symptoms of PTSD) increased in severity in late 2015.  He started having occasional panic attacks and having difficulty getting along with family members and friends.  He started to isolate himself more often and had difficulty sleeping most nights.  Evidence does not include any medical opinions indicating that the PTSD interfered with prior employment or would prevent employment at any time. 
 
A VA musculoskeletal examination performed in March of 2014, revealed full motion of the right knee with pain.  X-ray evidence revealed arthritis.  No instability of the knee was found.  The Veteran reported pain with extended periods of walking and standing.  He takes over-the-counter pain medication as needed for knee pain.  He does not use a cane or other ambulatory aids.  No surgery has been performed on the right knee.   
 
A VA examination performed in March of 2014 revealed a mild bilateral hearing loss.  The Veteran was able to hear well during the examination.  His speech discrimination scores were 98% in each ear.  The examiner stated that the hearing loss would not affect employment.  
 
It is the established policy of the Department of Veterans Affairs that all Veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. None of the available evidence supports the Veteran’s contention that any of his service-connected disabilities or a combination of the effects of the disabilities prevents all types of gainful activity.  
 
RECOMMENDATION:  [Provide a recommendation, to include an effective date, if applicable.]
 
Example:  Grant entitlement to TDIU on an extra-schedular basis effective June 20, 2017.
 
SIGNATURES:  [Document signatures on VA Form 21-0961 by following procedures in M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.C.3.e.]


 
4.  P&T Evaluations
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on the rating determination for DEA under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35, including
definition of a 
total disability, and 
permanent disability
requirement for permanence
evidentiary threshold for establishing permanence
establishing permanence for chronic, progressive disabilities
date of P&T disability 
when claimed or raised as a subordinate issue, and
upon cancellation or dismissal of review examination control
P&T reasons for decision
addressing the P&T status of disabilities normally requiring a review examination, and
granting P&T without Dependents' Educational Assistant (DEA).

Change Date

July 21, 2022

V.ii.3.D.4.a. Definition:  Total Disability

Total disability means
schedular or extraschedular evaluations of 100 percent under, or by analogy to, any DC in 38 CFR Part 4 
a combined evaluation of 100 percent, or
a total evaluation on the basis of IU.
Reference:  For more information on a total disability evaluation for the loss of paired organs or extremities under 38 U.S.C. 1160, see Kimberlin v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 174 (1993).

V.ii.3.D.4.b.  Definition: Permanent Disability

Permanent disability means disabling manifestations reasonably certain to continue throughout the lifetime of the individual. 
Reference:  For more information on permanent disability, see
38 U.S.C. 3501
38 CFR 3.340, and
38 CFR 4.15.

V.ii.3.D.4.c.  Requirement for Permanence

The mere existence of a total disability evaluation is not sufficient to establish a P&T evaluation. The evidence must establish permanence of the total evaluation, as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4.d. Total evaluations assigned under the following provisions are temporary:
prestabilization (38 CFR 4.28)
extended VA hospitalization (38 CFR 4.29)
convalescence (38 CFR 4.30), and 
any DC that provides for a limited period of total disability for convalescence such as joint replacements or cardiac procedures.
Exceptions: 
Veterans who are considered P&T disabled prior to the assignment of a 100-percent evaluation under a DC with a limited duration and future examination will be considered permanently disabled during the total evaluation.  The status of permanency is reconsidered following completion of the examination.  Example:  A Veteran who is considered permanently and totally disabled because of a heart disorder based on metabolic equivalents (METs) undergoes cardiac transplantation surgery.  The Veteran would continue to be considered P&T disabled for the duration of the one-year convalescent period under 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7019. 
A temporary total evaluation on the date of death will establish a P&T disability.  Total disability did persist from the date assigned until the end of the person’s life.  

V.ii.3.D.4.d.  Evidentiary Threshold for Establishing Permanence

Permanence of a total disability evaluation may be established when the evidence of record clearly establishes that a disability is expected to continue at its current level of severity.  However, clear and specific evidence is not required to establish permanence. 
 
When the evidence of record does not clearly or specifically show that the total disability will continue but also does not show that a reexamination to ascertain improvement is warranted pursuant to 38 CFR 3.327(b)(2), concede permanence of the evaluation based on a reasonable certainty that improvement is not likely.
 
The following fact patterns demonstrate scenarios in which P&T disability is established based on the preponderance of the evidence of record.
Evidence at the time of evaluation affirmatively shows that the total disability will continue for the remainder of the person’s life.
Evidence at the time of evaluation does not specifically support that the total disability will continue for the remainder of the person’s life but does not show that the condition is likely to improve pursuant to 38 CFR 3.327(b)(2).  In such cases, a future examination control is inappropriate so the total disability rating is static; in the absence of re-evaluation, total disability is likely to continue for the remainder of the person’s life.
At or before the time of maturation of a future examination diary pertinent to the continuation of total disability, the future examination control is canceled because
the future exam control was erroneous under 38 CFR 3.327(b)(2), or
evidence is received that changes the prior assessment that the condition was likely to improve.
Total disability has been in effect for 20 or more years per 38 CFR 3.951.  In such cases, the total disability is protected and is therefore static and will continue for the remainder of the person’s life. 
A qualifying individual with total disability dies. In such cases, the total disability is permanent because it persisted until the end of the person’s life.
Notes:  
The evidentiary threshold provided in 38 U.S.C. 3501(a)(8) to establish permanence is that there must be a reasonable certainty that the level of impairment will continue throughout the life of the disabled person.  This threshold means that there is more than an approximate balance of evidence indicating that the level of impairment will continue indefinitely.  
For historical purposes, a 100-percent evaluation under the 1925 rating schedule also meets the criteria of a “total disability, permanent in nature,” for DEA, per 38 CFR 3.952.
Reference:  For more information on the definition of static disability, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 2.B.2.b.

V.ii.3.D.4.e. Establishing Permanence for Chronic, Progressive Disabilities

When evidence indicates that cancer or other similarly chronic and progressive disabilities are not expected to improve, concede permanence for the disability evaluation.  Examples of indicators suggesting the likelihood that the disability status is permanent include but are not limited to
a prescription for palliative treatment only for a cancer diagnosis
a prescription for hospice care, or
an indicator in medical evidence that the condition is considered terminal. 

V.ii.3.D.4.f.  Date of P&T Disability When Claimed or Raised as a Subordinate Issue

Basic eligibility based on a P&T SC disability is only established when all criteria (i.e., SC, total disability, and permanence of disability) are met.
 
Therefore,  the date of P&T disability is the later of 
the date of claim, or
the date that the final criterion is factually established.  
Notes:  
If medical evidence reviewed in connection with a claim portrays an increase in SC disability, warranting a finding of permanence, establish the P&T evaluation and apply the effective date provisions of whichever of the following is more applicable/appropriate:
38 CFR 3.400(o)(2), or
38 CFR 3.2500(h).
When results of a VA-initiated review/future examination portray permanence of an individual or combined total disability evaluation, establish basic eligibility to a P&T evaluation as of the date the examination was performed.
Attribute examination or other findings dated after the date of claim back to the date of claim unless there is specific evidence there was a change to total disability or to permanece of disability between the date of claim and the date of the evidence.  
Example:  A VA examination finding that contains an opinion on permanence of disability would be attributed to the date of claim unless there was specific evidence dated on or after the date of claim, and prior to the VA examination date, indicating that the total disability was likely to improve, in which case the date of permanence would be the date of examination. 
References:  For more information on 
effective dates, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A, and
entitlement to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) arising from P&T evaluations, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 1.A.

V.ii.3.D.4.g.  Date of P&T Disability Upon Cancellation or Dismissal of Review Examination Control

Use the table below to determine the date of P&T disability when
there is total disability but no indication of permanence based on an established future or review examination control, and
a P&T determination is subsequently necessitated by one of the following actions:
cancellation of the future examination control prior to maturation, or
determination that a review examination should not be scheduled at the time the future examination control matures. 
When the action is based on ...
Then ...
a determination that the examination control was initially set up in error
 
Example:  In violation of 38 CFR 3.327(b)(2), a future examination control is set for a condition, like amytrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), that can only be rated at 100 percent and is, by its nature, permanent.
set the date of P&T disability as if the future examination control were never established.
 
Explanation:  The examination control was erroneous; therefore, the condition was static at the time of the rating decision establishing SC.
a difference in judgment rather than a specific error in the initial future examination control
 
Example:  The rating activity determines, prior to scheduling, that a review examination should not be scheduled as planned because the conclusion of likely future improvement used to set the future examination control was not well justified by the facts.
use the date of review for the date of P&T disability.
 
Explanation:  This is essentially a new determination of permanency on the date of review caused by reexamination of the facts.
new evidence that changes the prior assessment that the total disability is likely to improve, as indicated by a future examination control
use the date that the new evidence is received for the date of P&T disability. 
 
Exception:  When the new evidence portraying disability permanence is dated within one year prior to the date of the current review, apply the effective date provisions of 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2).
References:  For more information on effective dates
for increased compensation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5, and
based on historical 38 CFR 3.157, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.B.1.


V.ii.3.D.4.h.  P&T Reasons for Decision

Rating decisions establishing P&T status must provide 
the basis for the decision, and
a discussion of the evidence supporting the decision.

V.ii.3.D.4.i.  Addressing the P&T Status of Malignancies

VBMS-R’s system-generated language for evaluating totally disabling SC malignancies or other disabilities normally requiring a review examination usually includes reference to the scheduling of a mandatory review examination intended to determine recurrence or residual disability.
 
When, however, P&T status of the SC disability has been conceded in light of the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4.e, edit the rating decision narrative by replacing the system-generated text displayed in the left column of the table below with the text displayed in the right column.
VBMS-R System-Generated Text
Replacement Text
A rating of 100 percent shall continue beyond the cessation of any surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy or other therapeutic procedure.  Six months after discontinuance of such treatment, the appropriate disability rating shall be determined by mandatory VA examination.  Any change in evaluation based upon that or any subsequent examination shall be subject to the provisions of 38 CFR §3.105(e).  If there has been no local recurrence or metastasis, you will be rated on residuals.
The medical evidence shows that permanence of this disability has been established.  Consequently, no future VA examination will be requested.
References:  For more information on 
assigning P&T evaluations for amyloid light chains amyloidosis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 9.2.a, and
historical assignment of P&T evaluations for multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 9.2.f.

V.ii.3.D.4.j. Granting P&T without DEA

When a P&T evaluation is established, if eligibility for DEA is not being established as an ancillary benefit in the same rating decision (for example, when eligibility for DEA has been granted in a prior decision or is not warranted for a grant of benefits under 38 U.S.C. 1151), modify the rating narrative text to provide a discussion of only the permanence determination unless a decision is specifically required for DEA.

  
5.  Principles of Disability Evaluation for Specific Conditions
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about evaluating specific conditions or circumstances, including
evaluating malignant neoplasms and associated impairments
examples of evaluating diagnosed disabilities due to malignant neoplasms
evaluating an SC disability eliminated by NSC amputation, and
considering recurrent or refractory symptoms.

Change Date

September 15, 2021

V.ii.3.D.5.a.  Evaluating Malignant Neoplasms and Associated Impairments 

Use the table below to determine whether a symptom or condition associated with an active malignant neoplasm may be separately evaluated during the period in which a 100-percent evaluation is warranted for the active malignant neoplasm.
  
If the condition is a ...
Then ...
purely symptomatic complaint arising from the malignant neoplasm
do not assign a separate evaluation.
symptom arising from treatment for the malignant neoplasm
do not assign a separate evaluation.
diagnosed disability deemed to be caused by or related to the malignant neoplasm
apply 38 CFR 4.14 to determine whether the symptoms of the diagnosed disability are considered in the 100-percent evaluation for the malignant neoplasm
review the evaluation criteria for both conditions and other applicable provisions to determine whether separate evaluations are allowable, and
if the pyramiding rule in 38 CFR 4.14 has not been violated and separate evaluations are otherwise allowable, assign a separate evaluation.
Note:  When the DC for the active malignancy is directive as to how to evaluate residuals of the cancer, conditions or symptoms that
would be rated as residuals should not be assigned a separate evaluation during the pendency of the 100-percent evaluation for the active malignancy, and
would not be rated as residuals may be granted separately and concurrently with the 100-percent evaluation. 
metastatic malignant neoplasm affecting a different body system than is affected by the primary SC neoplasm
assign a separate evaluation.
 
Note:  For the purpose of determining entitlement to SMC at the statutory housebound rate under 38 CFR 3.350(i)(1), carcinoma that has metastasized and involves two different body systems would generally be considered separate and distinct.  The fact that there is an etiological relationship does not preclude considering the impact and effects as separate and distinct.
metastatic malignant neoplasm affecting the same body system as is affected by the primary SC neoplasm
do not assign a separate evaluation.
 
Note:  This guidance is applicable when language within a particular DC refers to malignant neoplasms in plural.
 
Note:  If doubt arises as to the medical cause or association of any symptoms or diagnosis, a medical opinion should be requested for clarification. 
 
References:  For more information on
assignment of separate evaluations for individual findings, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b, and
entitlement to SMC based on housebound status, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.10.

V.ii.3.D.5.b.  Examples of Evaluating Diagnosed Disabilities Due to Malignant Neoplasms 

Example 1:  SC for anxiety disorder claimed and diagnosed as secondary to active lung cancer may be granted and separately evaluated.
 
Example 2:  A Veteran is SC with a 100-percent evaluation assigned for active renal cancer and undergoes a nephrectomy as a part of the treatment for the renal cancer.  38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7528 directs that renal cancer is evaluated as active malignancy and its residuals are evaluated based on either voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction.  Since a nephrectomy is evaluated either with the minimum compensable evaluation or as renal dysfunction under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7500, the rating schedule recognizes that renal dysfunction is within the predominant symptomatology of both disabilities.  Since both criteria contemplate renal dysfunction, the nephrectomy cannot be separately evaluated.
 
Example 3:  A Veteran is SC with a 100-percent evaluation assigned for active renal cancer.  The Veteran is diagnosed with recurrent pyelonephritis which is characterized by symptoms of recurrent urinary tract infection.  The pyelonephritis is identified as a complication of the renal cancer.  38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7528 directs that renal cancer is evaluated as active malignancy and its residuals are evaluated based on either voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction.  Since the pyelonephritis is characterized by recurrent urinary tract infection, which is not considered within the criteria for evaluating malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system, a separate evaluation may be assigned under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7504 utilizing the urinary tract infection symptoms.
 
Example 4:  A Veteran is SC with a 100-percent evaluation assigned under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7343 for active colon cancer.  The Veteran sustained a nerve injury during surgery for the colon cancer resulting in impairment of anal sphincter control with incontinence.  Since the symptoms of impairment of sphincter control with incontinence are due to a separately diagnosed disability (the nerve injury), pyramiding rules are not violated, and 38 CFR 4.114 does not prohibit separate evaluations for these coexisting digestive system disabilities, a separate evaluation may be assigned for the nerve injury with impairment of sphincter control under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7332. 
Example 5:  A Veteran is SC with a 100-percent evaluation assigned under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7528.  A VA examination revealed a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction due to the prostate cancer.  Since 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7528 directs that prostate cancer is evaluated based on residuals consisting of voiding dysfunction or urinary tract infection, SC for the erectile dysfunction should be established concurrently with the 100-percent evaluation.

V.ii.3.D.5.c.  Evaluating an SC Disability Eliminated by NSC Amputation

Where an NSC cause necessitates amputation of an extremity resulting in elimination of an SC disability distal to the site of the amputation, do not sever SC for or reduce the evaluation of the SC disability. 

V.ii.3.D.5.d.  Considering Recurrent or Refractory Symptoms

Many evaluation criteria require consideration of the frequency of occurrence of symptoms.  Two descriptions used throughout the rating schedule for frequency of occurrence are refractory and recurrent. 
Recurrent describes signs, symptoms, or a disease that returns after a period of remission (or a period of time during which the symptoms could not be detected).
Refractory describes a disease, condition, or symptoms that do not respond or are resistant to treatment.
Example:  The evaluation criteria for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related illness at 38 CFR 4.88b, DC 6351 utilizes recurrent symptoms for the 30-percent evaluation and refractory symptoms for the 60-percent evaluation.

M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 4, Section A - Effective Dates
Article ID: 554400000180492
Updated Jun 24, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Guidance on Assignment of Effective Dates
2
Impact of Intent to File (ITF) on Effective Date
3
Effective Dates for Direct and Secondary Service Connection (SC)
4
Effective Dates for Presumptive SC
5
Effective Dates for Claims for Increased Compensation
6
Effective Dates Based on a Change of Law or Regulation
7
Effective Dates Based on Judicial Precedents or General Counsel Opinions
8
Claims for Earlier Effective Dates


 
 1.  General Guidance on Assignment of Effective Dates 
 

Introduction
 
This topic includes information about general principles for assigning effective dates, including
gathering evidence for effective date determinations
general effective date rule
definition of date entitlement arose
determining 
the applicable date of claim for effective date purposes, and
whether date of claim or date entitlement arose is later
effective date 
of entitlement versus effective date of payment, and
associated with sympathetic reading or a within-scope determination
impact of Public Law (PL) 112-154, Section 506, on fully developed claim (FDC) effective dates, and
maximizing benefits with effective date determinations.

Change Date
 
January 13, 2025

V.ii.4.A.1.a.  Gathering Evidence for Effective Date Determinations 
 
The assignment of an effective date is an integral part of the decision-making process as it establishes the date from which entitlement to benefits begins.
Assignment of effective date for the purposes of payment of benefits is directed in statute at 38 U.S.C. 5110 and regulated by 38 CFR 3.400.
Assignment of effective date for general purposes associated with reductions and discontinuances is directed in statute at 38 U.S.C. 5112and regulated by 38 CFR 3.500.
Effective date determinations are made based on facts gathered during review of the evidence.  Particularly, answers to the questions below drive the effective date determination.
What is the issue?  Some examples of types of issues include but are not limited to
claim for
service connection (SC)
pension entitlement, or
increased evaluation, or
a request
to review a prior decision
to add a dependent, or
for burial benefits.
What is the date of receipt of claim?
Did the claimant submit an intent to file (ITF)?
What is the date basic entitlement arose?
Do any liberalizing laws or other Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) issues apply?  Some examples of liberalizing laws or other VA issues include but are not limited to
38 CFR 3.114 for changes in law or issue, or
the Nehmer v. United States Department of Veterans Affairs, No. CV-86-6160 TEH (N.D. Cal.), court order.
Is this a continuously pursued claim or issue under 38 CFR 3.2500?
Reference:  For more information on the impact of the Nehmer court order on assignment of effective dates, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 2.B.2.

V.ii.4.A.1.b.  General Effective Date Rule 
 
The general rule is that the effective date is assigned based on the date of receipt of claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  Before applying the general rule, however, all information gathered during evidence review must be considered to determine whether a more specific effective date rule applies.
 
Note:  Date of claim and effective date are not synonymous.  Although the effective date is often the date of receipt of the claim, the effective date is determined by a variety of factors and is frequently not the same date as the date on which the claim is received. 
 
References:  For more information on
the general effective date rule, see 38 CFR 3.400
determining the date of receipt of a claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart i, 2.B.1
reviewing applications, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A
stating the effective date and explaining the reason for effective date in a rating decision, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A.5.a
effective date procedures associated with the rating Codesheet, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.3, and
the impact of a previously withdrawn claim on the assignment of effective date for a subsequent claim, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.F.


V.ii.4.A.1.c.  Definition:  Date Entitlement Arose 
 
There is no regulatory definition of the phrase date entitlement arose. However, in Wright v. Gober, 10 Vet.App. 343 (1997), the phrase "date entitlement arose" was found to be similar to the phrase "facts found."  This case, along with the regulatory context, strongly suggest that the date entitlement arose is the date on which the facts in the case demonstrate that the entitling criteria are first met.  

V.ii.4.A.1.d.  Determining the Applicable Date of Claim for Effective Date Purposes

When determining the date of claim and its relationship to the proper effective date for assignment, consider the date of receipt of a complete claim, as well as a related ITF or incomplete claim filed within a year prior to the date of receipt of the complete claim.
 
Notes:  
If a claimant files both an ITF and an incomplete claim before the complete claim is filed, the complete claim will be considered filed as of the date of receipt of whichever was filed first, provided it is perfected within the necessary timeframe.
Occasionally, mail processing delays, public health emergencies, natural disasters, or other extenuating events may impact claim submission timeliness and downstream date of claim considerations.  In those cases, wherever applicable, follow any relevant temporary or interim guidance for date of claim processing, to include resources available on the Compensation Service Interim Guidance Page.
Example 1:  A Veteran submits an ITF for compensation on August 6, 2020, and an incomplete claim for compensation on July 30, 2021.  Following notification of the incomplete claim, the Veteran then submits a complete claim for the same issues on September 27, 2021. 
 
Result:  The Veteran did not perfect the ITF within the required timeframe.  Therefore, VA cannot apply the ITF to the effective date as the complete claim was received more than a year after the date on which the ITF was filed.  However, the incomplete claim can be used for effective date purposes on any awarded issues filed on the complete claim since the incomplete claim was perfected within the required timeframe. 
 
Example 2:  A Veteran submits an ITF for compensation on June 20, 2021, and an incomplete claim on July 30, 2021.  Following notification of the incomplete claim, the Veteran then submits a complete claim for the same issues on September 27, 2021.
 
Result:  The Veteran perfected the ITF by filing the complete claim within the necessary one-year timeframe.  Therefore, VA can apply the ITF to the effective date of any awarded issues filed on the complete claim.
References:  For more information on
determining the date of claim for claims establishment purposes, see
38 CFR 3.155(d), and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.c
effect of ITFs on effective dates, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.c
ITFs and supplemental claims, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.b and c, and
handling incomplete claims, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b.

V.ii.4.A.1.e.Determining Whether Date of Claim or Date Entitlement Arose Is Later 
 
The determination as to whether the date of claim or date entitlement arose is later, as specified in the general rule, is dependent on the date when the entitling criteria for the benefit sought are met.  
The entitling criteria for a claim are frequently met on or before the date of claim based on the lay, medical, and other information presented during the entire process of claim development.
When applying the general rule, the assignment of an effective date based on date entitlement arose being later than the date of receipt of the claim is only appropriate when the evidence clearly establishes that the entitling criteria were not met as of the date of receipt of the claim. 
Example 1:  A Veteran claims SC for a knee condition with pain on March 21, 2015.  There are no post-service treatment records submitted with the claim.  Service treatment records (STRs) do show treatment for chronic knee pain and complaints of instability during service.  The VA examination dated July 14, 2015, confirms a diagnosis of patellofemoral pain syndrome. 
 
Analysis:  The entitling criteria are met on or before the date of the claim because the Veteran reported the presence of a chronic disability which was later confirmed on examination and linked to military service.  There is no affirmative evidence indicating that the knee disability was not present on the date of receipt of the claim.  In fact, the evidence indicates the presence of a chronic knee disability due to the in-service knee problems that predated the claim.  Thus, the effective date may be assigned based on the date of receipt of the claim unless a different, specific effective date provision otherwise applies.
 
Example 2:  A Veteran claims SC for elevated blood sugar due to possible diabetes on October 8, 2014, associated with confirmed Vietnam service.  Private treatment records are requested and received showing that the Veteran's blood sugars were first slightly elevated in June 2013, and the records document continued monitoring thereafter.  A VA examination dated January 3, 2015, indicates a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus, and the physician notes that the diagnostic criteria for diabetes were first met as shown in the private treatment records on November 13, 2014, when blood sugars and other testing met the American Diabetes Association criteria for a diabetes diagnosis, as the documented symptoms prior to that time were not sufficient for a diagnosis.   
 
Analysis:  The entitling criteria were not met as of the date of the receipt of the claim because the symptoms were not sufficient for a diagnosis of the disability at that time.  There is affirmative evidence showing that the entitling criteria (which require the presence of a chronic disability) were first met on November 13, 2014, which is later than the date of receipt of the claim.  Thus, the effective date is assigned based on the date entitlement arose since it is later than the date of claim, unless a different, specific effective date provision otherwise applies.  

V.ii.4.A.1.f.  Effective Date of Entitlement Versus Effective Date of Payment 
 
Under 38 CFR 3.31, VA may not pay monetary benefits based on an initial or supplemental award of compensation, pension, or Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) for any period prior to the first day of the calendar month following the month in which the beneficiary became entitled to the benefit. 
Reference:  For more information on effective date of payment and exceptions to payment under 38 CFR 3.31, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.A.2.b.

V.ii.4.A.1.g.  Effective Date Associated With Sympathetic Reading or a Within Scope Determination
 
The effective date of a grant of SC for any disabilities arising from the sympathetic reading of a claim, or finding a disability within the scope of a different claimed disability, is governed by the date of receipt of the expressly claimed issue which resulted in sympathetic reading and/or finding a disability within scope.  
Sympathetic reading and/or finding one disability within scope of another claimed disability may occur in any type of claim for compensation (initial, supplemental, etc.) or pension, and potentially in other claim situations.
Examples:
A Veteran claims SC for hearing loss.  The examination report disclosed that the Veteran reported ringing of the ears during service.  The examiner diagnosed tinnitus and related it to the Veteran’s service.  In such a situation, the tinnitus claim is considered within the scope of the hearing loss claim.  If SC is otherwise warranted for tinnitus, the assignment of effective date of the grant should be guided by the date that the claim for SC for hearing loss was received.
A Veteran claims SC for arthritis of the knees.  The examination showed no arthritis, but chondromalacia patellae and lateral instability were diagnosed.  If SC is in order, both conditions should be considered within the scope of the same claim for the knee and the same effective date assigned. 
References:  For more information on
handling issues within the scope of another claimed issue, see
38 CFR 3.155(d)(2)
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A.3.c
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2
Ellington v. Nicholson, 22 Vet.App. 141 (2007), and
Criswell v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 501 (2006), and
handling complications or residuals of a service-connected (SC) disability, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.e. 

V.ii.4.A.1.h.  Impact of PL 112-154, Section 506, on FDC Effective Dates
 
In certain situations, retroactive effective dates were warranted under Public Law (PL) 112-154, Section 506, for certain fully developed claims (FDCs), as is discussed in 
M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 2.B.4, and
the attachment, Historical_M21-1III_i_3_SecB_2-19-19.docx.
Otherwise, a claim’s inclusion in the FDC Program does not uniquely impact effective date assignment, and the usual effective date rules relevant to the underlying claim type and/or individual adjudicated issue(s) are for application.

V.ii.4.A.1.i.  Maximizing Benefits With Effective Date Determinations

In some situations, different theories of entitlement allow for assignment of different effective dates.  In such cases, consider each effective date rule when assigning an effective date and assign the most advantageous effective date that applies for the facts of the case. 
 
Note:  38 CFR 3.303(d) is not intended to limit the theory under which SC may be established, especially when one theory is more favorable than another.  This provision clarifies that SC for disabilities identified as presumptive may also be awarded on a direct basis, but it does not restrict the ability to award SC on a presumptive basis when both direct and presumptive SC may be supported.
 
Example:  A Veteran claims SC for coronary artery disease.  The evidence supports entitlement to SC on a presumptive basis for coronary artery disease associated with herbicide exposure, and 38 CFR 3.114 can be applied to grant an effective date one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim.  The criteria to grant an earlier effective date under 38 CFR 3.816 in accordance with the holding in Nehmer v. United States Veterans Administration, No. CV86-6160 TEH (N.D. Cal.), have not been met.  The evidence also supports a grant of SC as secondary to the Veteran’s SC diabetes mellitus.  For the secondary theory of entitlement, the effective date would be the date of receipt of the claim.  As the presumptive theory allows for assignment of an earlier effective date, SC should be granted on the presumptive basis to allow for maximized benefits.

 
2.  Impact of ITF on Effective Date 
 

Introduction
 
This topic includes information describing the impact of an ITF on assignment of effective dates, including
applicability of ITF on effective date assignment
effective date of entitlement following receipt of an ITF, and
examples of selecting an effective date following receipt of an ITF. 

Change Date
 
March 31, 2023

V.ii.4.A.2.a.  Applicability of ITF on Effective Date Assignment 
 
On March 24, 2015, 38 CFR 3.155 was revised to include procedures for a claimant to indicate a desire to file a claim via submission of an ITF.  When an ITF is properly submitted, and a complete initial claim is received within one year of the ITF, the complete initial claim is considered filed as of the date the ITF was received.  
Notes:  
The regulations governing ITF acceptance and impact, including 38 CFR 3.155, are not effective date rules.  The provisions for ITF apply to the date a claim is considered received, which in turn may impact determinations about effective dates.
When an application includes an application initiation date, decision makers should consider the application initiation date as the date of claim for the purposes of assigning an effective date.  
The application initiation date should not be recorded as the actual date of claim in other VA systems, however.  
Applications created through the Veterans Online Application (VONAPP) Direct Connect (VDC) on or after March 24, 2015, will not contain an application initiation date, as the application initiation date will be captured as an ITF in accordance with the Standard Claims and Appeals Forms Rule.
References:  For more information on 
procedures for handling ITFs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A
electronic application initiation date, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 4.A.3.c, and
special effective date provisions applicable to claims initiated in VDC but submitted in paper, see the attachment, Historical_M21-1III_i_4_SecC_9-21-17.doc.

V.ii.4.A.2.b. Effective Date of Entitlement Following Receipt of an ITF 
 
When an ITF is active and an applicable claim is subsequently received within one year of the date of receipt of the ITF, consider the claim received as of the date of receipt of the ITF as discussed in 38 CFR 3.155 and M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.
Note:  A Veteran may secure a benefit effective date as early as the day following separation from service if
an ITF is communicated within one year of separation from such service, and
a substantially complete application is subsequently submitted within one year of that ITF communication’s receipt.  

V.ii.4.A.2.c. Examples of Selecting an Effective Date Following Receipt of an ITF 
 
The table below contains examples of the proper assignment of effective dates following receipt of an ITF.
Scenario
Conclusions
VA receives VA Form 21-0966, Intent to File a Claim for Compensation and/or Pension, or Survivor’s Pension and/or DIC, from a Veteran on June 1, 2015.
The Veteran has checked the Compensation box in Section II of the form.
On January 1, 2016, VA receives a completed and signed VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, with a claim for an increased evaluation of the Veteran’s SC disabilities.
The potential effective date of entitlement to increased compensation is June 1, 2015, because VA received the VA Form 21-526EZ, within one year of the date it received the Veteran’s communication of an ITF.
Note:  The ITF helps identify the potential effective date but is not necessarily determinative of the outcome of effective date assignment.  All other applicable effective date regulations must be considered.  For example, application of 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2) may allow for assignment of an effective date earlier than the ITF based on treatment records showing worsening of the disability in the one year prior to receipt of the claim.
VA receives VA Form 21-0966from a Veteran on June 1, 2015.
On November 1, 2015, the Veteran begins a non-original, initial, online application for benefits through a VA claims submission service website.
On January 1, 2016, the Veteran completes and submits the online application.
Commencement of the online application process on November 1, 2015, constitutes a duplicatecommunication of an ITF.
The potential effective date of entitlement to benefits is June 1, 2015, because the Veteran completed and submitted the online application within one year of the date VA received the first communication of an ITF.
VA receives VA Form 21-0966 from a Veteran on March 26, 2015.  The Veteran checked the Compensation box on the form.
VA receives another VA Form 21-0966 from a Veteran on May 20, 2015.  The Veteran checked the Compensation box on the form.
VA receives a completed and signed VA Form 21-526EZ on April 8, 2016, for an increase in the evaluation of a SC back condition.
The potential effective date of entitlement to benefits is April 8, 2016, because
the application was not received within one year of the March 26, 2015, ITF, and
the VA Form 21-0966 received May 20, 2015, is a duplicatecommunication of an ITF since it is received within the active period of the already-received ITF and is for the same benefit.  
The duplicate ITF has no effect on benefit entitlement.
A Veteran communicates an ITF for compensation to a National Call Center (NCC) on June 1, 2015.
On November 1, 2015, the Veteran begins an online application for SC for a back disorder through a VA claims submission service website.
On January 1, 2016, VA receives a VA Form 21-526EZ from the Veteran with a non-original, initial claim for SC for a knee disorder.
On February 1, 2016, the Veteran completes and submits the online application for SC for a back disorder.
Commencement of the online application process on November 1, 2015, constitutes a duplicate(not a new and separate) communication of an ITF.
The potential effective date of entitlement to SC for the knee disorder is June 1, 2015, because VA received the VA Form 21-526EZ within one year of the date the Veteran contacted the NCC.
The potential effective date of entitlement to SC for the back disorder is February 1, 2016. (The receipt of VA Form 21-526EZ on January 1, 2016, prevents VA from considering the Veteran’s communication of an ITF when choosing an effective date for SC for the back disorder.)
A Veteran is honorably discharged from active duty on September 1, 2015.
On December 1, 2015, VA receives the Veteran’s communication of an ITF.
On November 1, 2016, VA receives VA Form 21-526EZ from the Veteran with a claim for SC for a knee disorder.
The potential effective date of entitlement to SC for the knee disorder is September 2, 2015, the day following the date of discharge.
 
Rationale: 
VA received the communication of an ITF within one year of the date of discharge.
VA received the VA Form 21-526EZ within one year of the date VA received the communication of an ITF.
On October 8, 2015, VA receives an ITF for compensation.
The in-country Vietnam Veteran subsequently mails VA an original FDC for SC for type 2 diabetes mellitus associated with exposure to Agent Orange.  Evidence shows a diagnosis of diabetes in 1999.
VA receives the Veteran’s claim on April 11, 2016.  
The potential effective date of entitlement to SC for diabetes is October 8, 2014, because
VA received communication of an ITF on October 8, 2015, and
38 CFR 3.114 applies to the effective date determination.
On December 18, 2021, the Veteran files an initial claim for SC of right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.
On March 2, 2022, the Veteran was notified that the claim was denied.  Evidence available at the time of the claim’s adjudication failed to confirm the existence of a clinical diagnosis.
On September 13, 2022, VA receives an ITF for compensation from the Veteran.
On February 27, 2023, VA receives a supplemental claim for SC for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity from the Veteran.
The supplemental claim is accompanied by private medical evidence documenting a clinical diagnosis as early as December 15, 2021.
The potential effective date of entitlement to SC for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity is December 18, 2021, the date of the initial claim.
Rationale:
The ITF received on September 13, 2022, establishes continuous pursuit of the December 2021 claim as the Veteran filed a(n)
ITF within one year of the March 2022 decision, and
complete supplemental claim within one year of the ITF.
The supplemental claim was not finally adjudicated prior to July 30, 2021.  On this date, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, in Military-Veterans Advocacy v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, No. 19-1600 (Fed. Cir. 2021), invalidated the portion of 38 CFR 3.155 which precluded the application of ITFs to supplemental claims.
The appropriate effective date rule is 38 CFR 3.2500(h)(1), which directs that the effective date will be fixed in accordance with the date of receipt of the initial claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.
Reference:  For more information on ITFs and supplemental claims, see
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.b, and
Policy Letter 23-01.
A new claim for lumbar arthritis is received on June 21, 2022, on VA Form 21-526EZ.
Rating decision dated August 10, 2022, denies entitlement to SC for lumbar arthritis due to no diagnosis.  The Veteran is notified the same day.
On December 22, 2022, an ITF for compensation on VA Form 21-0966 is received. 
On July 21, 2023, a new claim for eczema is received on VA Form 21-526EZ, which changes the ITF status to Claim Received.
On August 30, 2023, VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, for lumbar arthritis is received with new and relevant evidence. 
The potential effective date of entitlement to SC for lumbar arthritis is August 30, 2023, the date the supplemental claim was received.
 
Rationale:
The VA Form 21-526EZsubmitted on July 21, 2023, is the next received compensation claim; therefore, the December 22, 2022, ITF applies to the claim for eczema, not the subsequently filed supplemental claim for lumbar arthritis. 
The ITF in this scenario does notrepresent continuous pursuit, because the ITF was not in Activestatus when the Veteran filed the supplemental claim.
The Veteran filed the supplemental claim more than one year after the notice of decision.
The appropriate effective date rule is 38 CFR 3.2500(h)(2), which directs that the effective date will be fixed in accordance with the date entitlement arose, but will not be earlier than the date of receipt of the supplemental claim.


 
 
3.  Effective Dates for Direct and Secondary SC 
 

Introduction
 
This topic includes information clarifying the principles for assigning effective dates for claims for direct and secondary SC under 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2), including
procedures for handling claims for direct SC
example 1 of the effective date for direct SC
example 2 of the effective date for direct SC
claims for compensation received within one year of dishonorable service
effective date for a claim received during a period of hospitalization
effective dates for secondary SC, and
correlation between effective date for primary and secondary SC. 

Change Date
 
June 24, 2025

V.ii.4.A.3.a.  Procedures for Handling Claims for Direct SC 
 
Claims for compensation based on direct SC are governed by 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2)(i). 
 
There are two main provisions of this effective date rule.  
For claims received more than one year following discharge from active duty, the general rule applies.  Thus, the effective date will be date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.
For claims within one year of discharge from a period of active duty, the effective date may be as early as the day following discharge.  Refer to the table below for more information on the application of this provision of 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2)(i).  
Step
Action
1
Is the date of receipt of the claim within one year of discharge?
If yes, go to Step 2.
If no, then apply the general rule, unless another effective date rule applies.
2
Review the character of discharge (COD) for the most recent period of service.  Refer to the table below to determine appropriate action to take based on the COD.
 
If the separation from service was ...
Then ...
under conditions other than dishonorable
go to Step 3.
dishonorable and only a single period of service was performed
refer to M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.A.
dishonorable but
 
there were multiple periods of continuous service, and
the prior period of service was under conditions other than dishonorable
refer to M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.3.d.
 
References:  For more information on
the necessity of a COD determination in claims involving dishonorable service, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.A.1, and
conditional discharge determinations following a period of dishonorable service, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.B.1.
 
3
Determine when the disability was incurred or aggravated during the Veteran’s military service. 
 
Did active duty service continue without a break in service from the date the claimed disability was incurred or aggravated?
If yes, go to Step 4.
If no, then apply the general rule unless another effective date rule applies.
4
Were the entitling criteria for a grant of SC met as of the day following discharge?
If yes, then grant SC effective the day following discharge.
If no, then grant SC effective the date entitlement arose.
Exception:  If a claim is received to reinstate compensation following a return to active duty, apply 38 CFR 3.654(b) and follow the procedures in M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 2.B.1.g.
Note:  A Veteran may seek entitlement to SC for new disabilities concurrently with a request to reinstate compensation following discharge from a period of active service.  The effective date of SC for the newly-claimed disabilities is assigned in accordance with the steps in the table above.
 
Reference:  For more information on effective dates for the resumption of compensation following release from active duty, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart i, 6.D.3.c.

V.ii.4.A.3.b.  Example 1: Effective Date for Direct SC
 
A Veteran claims SC for a knee disability. 
 
Facts: 
The claim is received on August 11, 2011. 
The Veteran was honorably discharged on July 15, 2010. 
Evidence supports a grant of SC for the knee disability on the basis that a chronic knee disability was incurred during the Veteran’s period of honorable active duty service.
Analysis:  Since the claim was not received within one year of the Veteran’s release from active service, the general rule applies.  The effective date is the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  As the entitling criteria were met as of the date of receipt of the claim by virtue of the existence of a chronic disability present since its incurrence in service, the effective date is the date of receipt of the claim.

V.ii.4.A.3.c.  Example 2: Effective Date for Direct SC
 
A Veteran claims SC for a back disability. 
Facts:
The claim is received on October 11, 2015. 
The Veteran has two periods of honorable active service that are non-continuous. 
The first period of service was from December 19, 2000, to December 18, 2008. 
The Veteran was in the Army National Guard from 2008 until present. 
The second period of active service was a period of Title 10 service when the Veteran was deployed with an Army National Guard unit from July 22, 2014, to August 2, 2015. 
The Veteran was diagnosed with degenerative disc disease of the thoracolumbar spine during the first period of service.  The Veteran’s back disability required no additional treatment and is not mentioned in the STRs for the second period of active service. 
The evidence of record supports a grant of SC for degenerative disc disease on the basis that it was incurred during the first period of active service.
Analysis:  Although the claim was received within one year of the Veteran’s release from the recent period of honorable active service, since the back disability was not incurred or aggravated in the recent period of service and there was not continuous active service from the time the back disability was incurred, the effective date must be the date of receipt of the claim, October 11, 2015.

V.ii.4.A.3.d.  Claims for Compensation Received Within One Year of Dishonorable Service 
 
The provision of 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2)(i) allowing assignment of an effective date of the day following discharge is not applicable to dishonorable periods of service.  Thus, when multiple periods of continuous service are present but the character of service for the last period constitutes a bar to benefits as discussed in 38 CFR 3.12, the effective date will be date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 
 
Example 1:  The Veteran had two periods of service which were continuous.  The Veteran filed a claim three months after discharge.  The last period of service was characterized by a dishonorable discharge, so the character of service is a bar to VA benefits.  COD and conditional discharge determinations have been completed per M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.A.  SC benefits are warranted based on disabilities incurred during the first period of honorable service. 
 
Analysis:  Although the Veteran submitted the claim within one year of the release from active duty, the provision of 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2)(i) allowing assignment of an effective date the day following discharge is not for application because the last period of service is dishonorable.  The claim was not submitted within one year of the honorable period of service; the proper effective date is the date of receipt of the claim. 
 
Example 2:  The Veteran had two periods of service which were continuous.  The Veteran filed a claim prior to discharge from the last period of service. The last period of service was characterized by a dishonorable discharge, so the character of service is a bar to VA benefits.  COD and conditional discharge determinations have been completed per M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.A.  SC benefits are warranted based on disabilities incurred during the first period of honorable service. 
 
Analysis:  The Veteran is not entitled to VA compensation while receiving active service pay, per 38 CFR 3.654(b).  Under 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2)(i), the effective date is the date of claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  In this situation, the date entitlement arose is later than the date of claim.  The effective date is the day following separation date for the period of dishonorable service, which is the date entitlement arose. 

V.ii.4.A.3.e.  Effective Date for a Claim Received During a Period of Hospitalization 

When, during the course of a hospitalization in a VA or approved hospital for a period in excess of 21 days, SC for the disability under treatment is granted, establish entitlement to a temporary 100-percent rating from the first day of the hospitalization, if otherwise in order.
 
Example:  The Veteran was hospitalized at a VA facility for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) on June 27, 2011.  On July 14, 2011, the Veteran submitted an original claim for SC for PTSD.  On July 29, 2011, the Veteran was discharged from the VA facility.  Award SC with a temporary 100-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.29 from the date of admission to the VA facility, June 27, 2011.
 
References:  For more information on effective dates for hospital ratings
for disabilities claimed during the course of the hospitalization, see 38 CFR 4.29(b), and
for all general circumstances, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.B.2.a.

V.ii.4.A.3.f.  Effective Dates for Secondary SC 
 
Although 38 CFR 3.310 directs that a secondary disability shall be considered a part of the original condition, this regulation covers entitlement to secondary SC but does not direct assignment of an effective date. 
The effective date for secondary SC is governed by the general rule for assignment of effective dates described in the opening paragraph of 38 CFR 3.400.
A claim for secondary SC is an allegation of additional disability that is proximately due to or the result of a SC disease or injury.  As an additional disability, a secondarily SC disability cannot be treated as an increased evaluation under 38 CFR 3.400(o) for effective date purposes.  An award of increased compensation does not encompass an award of secondary SC because, by definition, secondary SC requires the incurrence of an additional disability which is separately rated under the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 
For effective date purposes, a secondary disability is distinguished from and treated differently than a complication of a disease process or other issue that is considered within scope of a separately claimed disability, as discussed at M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.1.g and M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.e.
The effective date of an award of SC is not based on the date of the earliest medical evidence demonstrating a causal connection between a primary condition and another disability secondarily related to it.  The effective date of secondary SC must be based on the date that the application upon which SC was eventually awarded was filed. 
References:  For more information on
the basis for not treating claims for secondary SC as claims for increase for effective date purposes, see Ross v. Peake, 21 Vet.App. 528 (2008)
the requirement of a claim in secondary SC scenarios, see Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet.App. 377 (1999)
effective dates for complications or residuals of a SC disability, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.e, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.1.g, and
arteriosclerotic manifestations granted secondary to hypertension, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.3.h. 

V.ii.4.A.3.g.  Correlation Between Effective Date for Primary and Secondary SC Disabilities 
 
The effective date assigned for a secondary SC disability cannot be earlier than the effective date assigned for the causal or primary SC disability. 
When an unclaimed causal condition is within the scope of a claim, as provided in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.d, the effective date of benefits for the causal disability is guided by the date of receipt of the claim for the secondary disability.
Example:  A Veteran files a claim for SC for right shoulder pain as the result of a fall caused by instability of the right knee which is not SC and has not otherwise been expressly claimed.  The unclaimed knee disability is within scope of the claimed shoulder disability and SC is supported for both disabilities.  The effective date for both issues is the date of receipt of the claim for SC for the right shoulder condition.
 
References:  For more information on
determining whether an unclaimed issue is within scope of a claimed issue, see
38 CFR 3.155(d)(2), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2
the correlation between effective dates assigned for the causal and secondary disabilities, see Delisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 45 (2011), and
SC on a secondary basis, including aggravation of non-service-connected disability by an SC disability, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.D. 

 
 4.  Effective Dates for Presumptive SC 

Introduction

This topic includes information clarifying the principles for assigning effective dates for claims for presumptive SC, including
effective dates for presumptive SC
example 1 of assigning effective dates for presumptive SC, and
example 2 of assigning effective dates for presumptive SC.   

Change Date

January 13, 2025

V.ii.4.A.4.a.  Effective Dates for Presumptive SC

The assignment of effective dates for presumptive SC is regulated by 38 CFR 3.400(b)(2)(ii).
 
The effective date will be the day following separation from service when all of the following criteria are met:
the claim is received within one year of separation from active duty, and
the requirements for SC are met during service, including evidence showing that the disability 
became manifest, and
was incurred or aggravated during active service, and
there was continuous active service following the period of service on which the presumption is based.
The effective date will be the date entitlement arose when all of the following criteria are met: 
the claim is received within one year of separation from active duty, and
the requirements for SC are not met during service. 
When the claim is not received within one year of separation from active service, the general rule applies and the effective date will be date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later, unless another effective date rule applies.  For example, 38 CFR 3.114 may apply to the assignment of an effective date for presumptive SC. 
 
References:  For more information on 
presumptive SC, see
38 CFR 3.307
38 CFR 3.308
38 CFR 3.309, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.B
presumptive disabilities and presumptive-exposure locations under Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act of 2022, see PACT Act Information Page, and
maximizing effective date determinations in herbicide claims, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.B.4.a.

V.ii.4.A.4.b.  Example 1: Assigning Effective Dates for Presumptive SC

Facts:  The Veteran served on active duty from June 21, 2012 to June 22, 2016, and submitted a claim for SC for hypertension on May 12, 2017.  STRs show no evidence of treatment for or diagnosis of hypertension during service.  Private treatment records show that the hypertension first manifested to a compensable degree on March 19, 2017.
 
Analysis:  The claim for SC was received within one year of release from active duty, but the requirements for SC were not met during service.  Thus, the effective date is the date entitlement arose, which is the date hypertension was first diagnosed, March 19, 2017.  

V.ii.4.A.4.c.  Example 2: Assigning Effective Dates for Presumptive SC

Facts:  The Veteran was discharged March 3, 1972.  Evidence showed the Veteran had confirmed service in Vietnam.  On February 22, 2017, the Veteran submitted a claim for SC for type 2 diabetes mellitus associated with herbicide exposure.  Private treatment records confirmed that the Veteran was diagnosed with and treated for type 2 diabetes mellitus with an oral hypoglycemic medication since 2015.  
 
Analysis:  The claim for SC was received more than one year following discharge from active service.  As the entitling criteria were all met as of the date of receipt of the claim, the proper effective date is the date of receipt of the claim.  38 CFR 3.114 is not applicable because the Veteran’s diabetes was first diagnosed in 2015, and no other effective date provision is appropriate based on the facts of this scenario.  

 
  
5.  Effective Dates for Claims for Increased Compensation 

Introduction

This topic includes information clarifying the  principles for assigning effective dates for claims for increased compensation under 38 CFR 3.400(o), including
regulatory provisions applicable to claims for increase
application of 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2)
effective dates for individual unemployability (IU) under 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2)
example of IU effective date impacted by 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2)
handling effective dates for complications or residuals of an SC disability
claims for increase received with requests for reinstatement, and
entitlement to aid and attendance (A&A) or housebound benefits for retroactive awards.

Change Date

January 13, 2025

V.ii.4.A.5.a.  Regulatory Provisions Applicable to Claims for Increase

Claims for increase are regulated by 38 CFR 3.400(o).  The effective date for a claim for increase will be the general rule, which is date of receipt of the claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later, unless one of the following three exceptions apply: 
After basic entitlement has been terminated, such as by severance of SC, a retroactive increase or additional benefit will not be awarded.
A grant of aid and attendance (A&A) or housebound benefits associated with an initial or supplemental claim for pension or compensation is regulated by 38 CFR 3.401(a).
Per 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2), increased compensation may be awarded on the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred if a complete claim or ITF is received within one year from such date.  
Important:  If an increased evaluation is awarded as part of a continuously pursued issue, the effective date is assigned based on 38 CFR 3.2500(h)(1).
References:  For more information on assigning effective dates for increased evaluations
under 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.b
associated with changes in the rating schedule, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.p
associated with retroactive awards of A&A or housebound benefits, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.g, and
in routine future review examination scenarios, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 2.A.

V.ii.4.A.5.b.Application of 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2) 

Receipt of medical reports may be used to establish effective date(s) for retroactive benefits based on facts found on an increase in disability.  The effective date will be the earliest date it is factually ascertainable that the increase in disability occurred if all the following criteria are satisfied:
A complete claim or ITF must be received within one year of the date the medical records show the initial increase in disability occurred.
When applying 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2), an increase in a Veteran’s SC disability must have occurred during the one-year prior to the date of the Veteran’s claim in order to receive an effective date of up to one year prior to the date of the claim. When the increased disability occurred more than one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim for increase, then the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim. 
The medical reports must relate to examination, hospitalization, or medical treatment of a disability for which SC has been previously established.
References:  For more information on assigning effective dates 
when an increase is shown more than one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim, see
Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 125, 126-27 (1997), and
Gaston v Shinseki, 605 F. 3d 979 (2010), and
based on acceptance of evidence of examination or hospitalization as an informal claim for increase prior to March 24, 2015, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.B, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.1.

V.ii.4.A.5.c.Effective Dates for IU Under 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2)

In Norris v. West, 12 Vet.App. 413, 420 (1999), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) held that evidence of a Veteran’s unemployability arising from an already SC disability is evidence of an increase in the severity of that disability. 
 
When considering a claim for individual unemployability (IU) based on an already SC disability(ies), review the evidence to determine whether it is factually ascertainable that the criteria for entitlement to IU were first met during the one-year period prior to the date of receipt of the claim. 
 
To determine whether an earlier effective date for IU under 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2)may be assigned, one of the two criteria for entitlement for IU under 38 CFR 4.16(a) must be demonstrated during the one year prior to date of receipt of the IU claim. 
 
When the evidence shows that one or both criteria below are satisfied in the one-year period prior to the date of receipt of the IU claim, an earlier effective date for IU under 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2) is warranted based on the date one or both criteria are satisfied.  Those criteria are
the evaluation of the SC disabilities is increased such as to satisfy the criteria for IU, including
a single SC disability rated at 60 percent or more, or
multiple SC disabilities yielding a combine rating of 70 percent or more with at least one of those disabilities rated 40 percent or more, and/or
an inability to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation. 
Important: 
Entitlement to IU requires that all criteria as described under 38 CFR 4.16(a) or (b) be met.  When one of the criteria has been met for an extended period of time (potentially years before the claim) and the remaining criteria arises during the one-year period prior to the date of receipt of the IU claim, consideration of an earlier effective date for IU is warranted.  Both criteria need not initially arise during the one year prior to receipt of the IU claim so long as both are met sometime prior to the effective date of the grant of entitlement to IU.  
Entitlement to IU is a potential consideration any time an SC disability is evaluated. 
Consequently, 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2) may be applied to the IU effective date
anytime an SC disability is evaluated and the outcome of the claim either grants or confirms and continues an evaluation causing the Veteran’s SC disabilities to satisfy the schedular criteria described in 38 CFR 4.16(a) for potential IU entitlement, and
the claim for IU is received within one year of the decision evaluating the SC disabilities such as to meet the schedular criteria. 
This is true whether the prior evaluation decision resulted in the schedular criteria having been met
for the first time
based on a confirmed and continued evaluation, or
based on an increased evaluation, even when the criteria were previously first met at the time of a prior determination. 
References:  For more information on
the effective date of a grant of increased compensation based on unemployability, see Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 23 (2007)
the prohibition on assigning an effective date for IU that precedes the effective date of SC for the underlying disabilities, see Delrio v. Wilkie, 32 Vet.App. 232 (2019), and
a grant of entitlement to IU following reduction of a schedular 100-percent evaluation, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.A.4.b.

V.ii.4.A.5.d.Example of IU Effective Date Impacted by 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2)

Facts:  On June 12, 2016, a Veteran submitted a claim for an increase in the 30-percent evaluation of PTSD.  The combined evaluation of the Veteran’s SC disabilities was 70 percent, with a single disability evaluated as 40-percent disabling, since 2010.  Development of the claim confirmed that the evaluation of the PTSD warranted an increase to 50 percent.  A rating decision dated December 5, 2016, granted the increased evaluation, and the combined evaluation of the Veteran’s SC disabilities increased to 80 percent effective June 12, 2016.  The Veteran was notified of the decision on December 5, 2016.  
 
The Veteran subsequently submitted VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, on February 17, 2017, reporting that the Veteran had stopped working in 2012 due to SC PTSD and other disabilities.  Development of the claim confirmed that entitlement to IU was warranted due to the combined effects of the Veteran’s SC disabilities. 
 
Analysis:  Since the Veteran last worked in 2012, which is more than one year prior to the claim, 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2) may not be applied to grant an effective date coinciding with the cessation of employment.  However, since the claim for increase, received on June 12, 2016, resulted in a combined evaluation that satisfied the schedular criteria for potential IU entitlement and the claim for IU was received within one year of the December 5, 2016, decision granting that combined evaluation, 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2) applies to the effective date.  Consequently, the proper effective date for the grant of IU is June 12, 2016, the date of receipt of the claim for increased evaluation since IU was an issue eventually associated with that claim for increase and it is factually ascertainable that the increase occurred within one year of the date of receipt of the IU claim.  

V.ii.4.A.5.e.Handling Effective Dates for Complications or Residuals of an SC Disability

When the evaluation criteria in 38 CFR Part 4 or other policy or procedural guidance directs that a given disability is to be rated based on residuals or that complications for a given disability are to be rated separately, the complications or residuals are considered increased manifestations of the primary disability.  Consequently, the applicable effective date rule is 38 CFR 3.400(o). 
 
Example 1:  The evaluation criteria for diabetes under 38 CFR 4.119, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7913, include the presence of complications of diabetes as a determinant of the proper evaluation.  Note (2) under the evaluation criteria instructs the rating activity to evaluate complications of diabetes separately if doing so would result in a greater evaluation.  Because of the language in 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913, the diagnosed complications of diabetes establish a worsening of the disability, and the provisions of 38 CFR 3.400(o) are applicable in determining the effective date of increased compensation, whether the evaluation of diabetes is increased or the complications of diabetes are separately established as SC.
 
Example 2:  The evaluation criteria for diseases and injuries of the spine under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5235-5242, Note 1, directs that associated objective neurological abnormalities be evaluated separately under an appropriate DC.  Based on this note, objective neurological abnormalities establish a worsening of the spinal disability, and the provisions of 38 CFR 3.400(o) are applicable in determining the effective date of increased compensation based on the presence of the neurological impairment without regard to whether the evaluation for the spinal disability is increased.
 
Note:  Although the disabilities are considered worsening of the primarily-diagnosed disability, procedural conventions within Veterans Benefits Management System - Rating (VBMS-R) require that the disabilities be coded as secondary to establish the connection between the primary disability and the associated complications or residuals.  However, the VBMS-R convention of identifying the disability as secondary does not impact assignment of an effective date.
 
References:  For more information on
rating issues that are within scope of a claimed issue, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A
considering complications of an expressly claimed issue, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c
additional effective date considerations for issues within scope of the primarily claimed condition, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.1.g, and
effective dates for secondary SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.3.f and g.

V.ii.4.A.5.f.  Claims for Increase Received With Requests for Reinstatement

Veterans often file a claim for an increased disability rating concurrently with their request for reinstatement of disability compensation following discharge from a period of active service.  Follow the procedures at M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 2.B.1.g for control of the claim and reinstatement of compensation. 
 
The effective date for the increased evaluation, if warranted, is regulated by 38 CFR 3.400.  The effective date is the earlier of the following dates:  
the date on which the increased disability was first shown (up to one year prior to the date VA received the claim) per 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2), or
the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.
Note:  The effective date may never fall within a period of active duty.

V.ii.4.A.5.g.  Entitlement to A&A or Housebound Benefits for Retroactive Awards 

The effective date of entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) or special monthly pension (SMP) is generally guided by date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, except as provided in 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2).
However, a special provision exists to allow an earlier effective date for entitlement to SMC or SMP when an award of compensation or pension benefits is effective for a period prior to the date of receipt of the claim.  This special provision, contained in 38 CFR 3.401(a), applies to
additional compensation or pension for a Veteran’s need for A&A or housebound status, or 
additional compensation due to the spouse’s need for A&A.
Example:  A Veteran submitted an original claim for compensation for ischemic heart disease (IHD) as due to herbicide exposure on June 22, 2019.  The Veteran’s personnel records confirmed herbicide exposure during service.  The evidence submitted with the Veteran’s claim shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with coronary artery disease prior to August 31, 2010 (the date IHD was added to the list of presumptive condition associated with herbicide exposure).  The claim included a request for entitlement to additional compensation based on A&A benefits for the Veteran’s spouse.
The effective date of the grant of SC for the heart disability (which is evaluated as 100-percent disabling) is impacted by 38 CFR 3.114(a)(3).  SC is warranted effective June 22, 2018, one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim.  
Evidence shows that the Veteran’s spouse suffered a severe stroke on October 14, 2018, which caused the requirement for A&A.  
Entitlement to additional compensation, payable to the Veteran, due to the spouse’s need for A&A is warranted effective October 14, 2018, the date the criteria for entitlement to A&A arose during the retroactive period of the award of SC compensation benefits.
Reference:  For more information on entitlement to additional compensation or pension during the retroactive period of an award, see 38 CFR 3.401(a).

 
 6.  Effective Dates Based on a Change of Law or Regulation 

Introduction

This topic includes information clarifying the principles for determining effective dates when a decision is impacted by new guidance, including
impact of guidance changes
definition of liberalizing law
significance of changes of law
awarding retroactive benefits based on a law change
origin of 
liberalizing issue, and
VA issue
statutory eligibility requirements for retroactive awards under 38 CFR 3.114
regulatory eligibility requirements for retroactive awards under 38 CFR 3.114
entitlement factors inapplicable for consideration under 38 CFR 3.114 for pension and Parents’ DIC
example 1 of age 65 liberalizing legislation in a pension claim
example 2 of age 65 liberalizing legislation in a pension claim
awarding or increasing benefits retroactively under 38 CFR 3.114
determining which statutory or regulatory version is more favorable
provision of due process for reducing or discontinuing awards under 38 CFR 3.114(b)
example of staged rating impacted by 38 CFR 3.114, and
applicability of revised rating schedule criteria.

Change Date

June 27, 2022

V.ii.4.A.6.a.  Impact of Guidance Changes

Changes to laws, regulations, or policy or procedural guidance may impact the assignment of effective dates.  The outcome of an effective date determination in such situations is dependent upon the
nature of the change, and
the status of the claim. 

V.ii.4.A.6.b.  Definition: Liberalizing Law 

A liberalizing law is one which brings about a substantive change in the law creating a new and different entitlement to a benefit.
Reference:  For more information on the definition of liberalizing law, as identified by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, see Spencer v. Brown, 17 F.3d 368 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

V.ii.4.A.6.c.  Significance of Changes of Law

Appropriately analyzing changes of law is critical to adjudication.  For the purpose of the guidance contained in this block, law means statutory changes, regulatory changes, or precedential case law.  Changes of law may alter the standard of entitlement, the burden of proof, the extent of the duty to assist, substantive due process requirements, the existing understanding of medical or legal concepts, or agency procedures. 
 
For new claims received after a change of law has become effective that affects the standard of entitlement to a benefit, the main consideration for decision makers is effective date.  It is important to analyze whether the newly applicable law has a liberalizing effect or potentially an adverse effect requiring the reduction or discontinuance of benefits. 
 
Note:  Some changes of law may necessitate a general review of potentially-impacted past claimants and current beneficiaries who do not have claims pending.  This may consist of outreach or even re-adjudication of claims.  However general reviews are not routinely mandated and should never be initiated by field decision makers in the absence of a specific agency directive permitting authorized review jurisdiction. 
 
With respect to claims pending when a change of law on the standard of entitlement becomes effective, the change creates a question of choice of law (applicability) and, potentially, effective date issues.  Failure to properly analyze the new law (and apply the new law as applicable) may result in an error or other need for correction of the rating decision. 
 
References:  For more information on
pending and finally adjudicated claims, see
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.A
38 CFR 3.160, and
Ingram v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 232 (2007), and
correcting errors or other deficiencies in rating decisions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.E.3.

V.ii.4.A.6.d.  Awarding Retroactive Benefits Based on a Law Change

Under 38 CFR 3.114(a), VA may award retroactive benefits if the claimant had potential entitlement at the time the liberalizing law, VA issue, such as certain precedent opinions of VA General Counsel, or regulation became effective. 
 
This regulation applies to
cases involving pending or previously denied claims, and
original claims filed after the change in law or administrative issue.
Note:  A liberalizing law is one which brings about a substantive change in the law creating a new and different entitlement to a benefit. 
 
References:  For more information on
determining whether a law is liberalizing, see
Brown v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 290 (2007)
Spencer v. Brown, 17 F. 3d 368, 372 (Fed. Cir. 1994), and
Green v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 100, 116 (1997)
the liberalizing effect of 38 CFR 3.304(f)(3) for certain claims for SC for PTSD, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.D.2.d, and
Ortiz v. McDonough, 6 F. 4th 1267 (Fed Cir. 2021), and
the impact of liberalizing laws on claims for pension, see
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.i, and
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.d.

V.ii.4.A.6.e.  Origin of Liberalizing Issue

A liberalizing issue originates from
regulation by VA, or
statutes (38 U.S.C.) by Congress. 

V.ii.4.A.6.f.  Origin of VA Issue

A VA issue originates from an existing regulation or a new regulation issued by VA. 

V.ii.4.A.6.g.  Statutory Eligibility Requirements for Retroactive Awards Under 38 CFR 3.114 

The plain language of 38 U.S.C. 5110(g) governing the effective date for a claim granted based on a favorable change in law and its implementing regulation requires two specific findings:
a liberalizing law or administrative issue was implemented, and
the ultimate grant of benefits was pursuant to such a favorable change in law. 
The use of the words pursuant to indicates that the benefits of this provision apply only where the law or administrative issue is one which provides a substantive basis for establishing entitlement to benefits. 
 
Note:  The regulatory criteria, as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.h, adds an additional requirement for eligibility.
 
Reference:  For more information on the threshold for eligibility pursuant to a liberalizing law or issue, see Brown v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 290 (2007).

V.ii.4.A.6.h.  Regulatory Eligibility Requirements for Retroactive Awards Under 38 CFR 3.114

The provisions of 38 CFR 3.114(a) for retroactive benefits apply to claimants who become eligible for initial or increased benefits solely because of liberalizing changes in law or administrative issues. 
 
In addition to the statutory eligibility standard provided in 38 U.S.C. 5110(g), 38 CFR 3.114 provides that the claimant must meet the eligibility requirements of the liberalizing law or regulations
on the effective date of the 
liberalizing law or regulation, and
award, and
during the entire retroactive period.
Important:  The requirements expressed in this block apply
equally to pending and previously denied claims, and
to any type of VA issue impacted by a law change, including but not limited to
rating issues
authorization issues, or
other benefit determinations, such as vocational rehabilitation/employment.
References:  For more information on
the effective date of liberalized regulations and associated application of 38 CFR 3.114, see Rhodan and Haywood v. West, 12 Vet.App. 55 (1998)
retroactive effective dates for Veterans Pension awards due to the age-65 and presumptive permanent and total disability provisions of Sections 206 and 207 of PL 107-103, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.d
provisions of law establishing entitlement for paired organs and extremities, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 7.A.1.c
liberalizing changes affecting SC for
traumatic brain injury (TBI), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.1.p and 2.i
IHD, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.1.e, and
PTSD, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.D.2.d
applicability of liberalizing changes for claims based on herbicide exposure in the Korean demilitarized zone, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.B.4.c and d, and
applying liberalizing legislation in a pension claim, or Parents’ DIC see 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.i-k, and
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.

V.ii.4.A.6.i.  Entitlement Factors Inapplicable for Consideration Under 38 CFR 3.114 for Pension and Parents’ DIC 

For pension and Parents’ DIC, the entitlement factors of income (and net worth for pension) are not considered to be eligibility factors for the purposes of qualifying for an effective date under 38 CFR 3.114.  
 
Eligibility factors for pension include factors such as wartime service, age 65 or disability for Veterans, and relationship to the Veteran for survivors.  Therefore, it is not necessary for a claimant’s income or net worth to have been within acceptable limits continuously from the effective date of a liberalizing law or regulation.  VA may pay pension or Parents’ DIC for all or any portion of the applicable retroactive period for which the claimant is entitled.
 
Partial retroactive payments during the liberalized period can be paid i
net worth changes during the liberalized period that allows a partial payment, or
the maximum annual pension rate (MAPR) changes during the liberalized period, which results in the income for VA purposes (IVAP) being less than the MAPR.
Note:  The MAPR can change if a dependent is added to the award or SMP is granted.  It does not include a change in medical expenses without a change in MAPR.
 
Reference:  For more information on application of 38 CFR 3.114 for pension and Parents’ DIC effective dates, see M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.

V.ii.4.A.6.j.  Example 1:  Age-65 Liberalizing Legislation in a Pension Claim

Situation:  A Veteran, age 85, is granted Veterans Pension based on the date of claim of October 17, 2014.  The grant is based on monthly retirement income of $1,200.00 and annual medical expenses of $4,858.00 (consisting of monthly Medicare Part B premiums of $104.90 and monthly supplemental health insurance of $300.00).
 
The Veteran submits a claim for an earlier effective date under liberalizing legislation within one year of VA’s decision notice, showing that income and net worth have not changed from the previous year.  However, medical expenses are slightly different in that the health insurance of $300.00 did not start until October 1, 2014.  Additionally, the claimant submitted $600.00 in eye care expenses paid in December 2014. 
 
Result:  The Veteran is eligible for consideration of an earlier pension effective date because the Veteran was age 70 on September 17, 2001, the effective date of section 207 of PL 107-103.  However, when entitlement is considered from October 17, 2013, based on the reported income and the corrected medical expense information, the Veteran’s IVAP exceeds the MAPR.  A retroactive benefit for the liberalized period cannot be granted because there was not a change in MAPR that allowed for a partial grant of benefits within the liberalized period.

V.ii.4.A.6.k.  Example 2:  Age 65 Liberalizing Legislation in a Pension Claim

Situation:  A Veteran, age 85, is granted Veterans Pension based on the date of claim of October 17, 2014.  The grant is based on monthly retirement income of $1,200.00 and annual medical expenses of $4,858.00 (consisting of monthly Medicare Part B premiums of $104.90 and monthly supplemental health insurance of $300.00).
 
The Veteran submits a claim for an earlier effective date under liberalizing legislation within one year of VA’s decision notice, showing that net worth and medical expenses have not changed for the prior year.  However, income is slightly different because a one-time inheritance of $5,000.00 was received on March 15, 2014. 
 
Result:  The Veteran is eligible for consideration of an earlier date because the Veteran was age 70 on September 17, 2001, the effective date of section 207 of PL 107-103.  When entitlement is considered from October 17, 2013, based on the reported income and medical expense information, the Veteran’s IVAP is below the applicable MAPR.  Therefore, the Veteran is entitled to an earlier pension effective date.  VA grants pension from October 17, 2013, payable November 1, 2013.  VA must readjudicate the award and count the inheritance of $5,000 from April 1, 2014, to April 1, 2015.  Pension payments are stopped from April 1, 2014, to April 1, 2015, as the Veteran’s IVAP exceeds the MAPR.  VA can re-start the award effective April 1, 2015, payable May 1, 2015, if evidence is available or submitted to show that the Veteran meets the income and net worth criteria for benefits from April 1, 2015.  If not, the Veteran may reapply for benefits at a later date. 
 
Note:  Because the Veteran claimed an earlier effective date for pension under liberalizing legislation, VA must readjudicate the claim based on the facts found.  VA has no authority to pick and choose the award effective date.  The Veteran has the choice to claim an earlier effective date under liberalizing legislation.  Therefore, if a claim is submitted, VA must readjudicate the claim using all of the facts and information submitted by the Veteran.  This would include counting all reported income and considering all allowable medical expenses applicable during the liberalized period.
 
References:  For more information on
computation of income, see 38 CFR 3.271, and
13-month rule, see
VAOPGCPREC 2-1989, and
M21-1, Part IX, Subpart iii, 1.A.6.e.

V.ii.4.A.6.l.   Awarding or Increasing Benefits Under 38 CFR 3.114

If a liberalizing law or approval of a liberalizing VA issue, such as a change in rating or dependency criteria, establishes liberalized standards of entitlement, then award or increase benefits retroactively, as outlined in the table below.
 
Exception:  This does not apply for any period prior to December 1, 1962.
  
If the claim is
reviewed …
And …
Then benefits may be awarded …
on the initiative of VA
within one year from the effective date of the law or VA issue
from the effective date of the law or VA issue.

more than one year after the effective date of the law or VA issue
for a period of one year prior to the date of administrative determination of entitlement.
at the request of the claimant
received within one year from the effective date of the law or VA issue
from the effective date of the law or VA issue.

received more than one year after the effective date of the law or VA issue
for a period of one year prior to the date of receipt of the request.
Note:  If an ITF was received within one year from the effective date of the law and the claimant submits a complete claim within a year of VA receiving the ITF for the same benefit, the benefits may be awarded from the effective date of the law or VA issue.
 
Reference:  For more information on ITF, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A.

V.ii.4.A.6.m.  Determining Which Statutory or Regulatory Version Is More Favorable

When a statute or regulation changes during the pendency of a claim to which the law is applicable, a determination must be made as to whether the new law or prior law is more favorable to the disposition of the pending claim.
 
The new law is more favorable if
it would support an allowance that the prior standard would not (such as SC, or an increased evaluation), or
both standards would support an allowance but the new standard would support an allowance of a greater degree (such as an increased evaluation or special monthly compensation).
The prior standard is more favorable when it would support
a greater allowance than the new law, or
the same allowance, making it more favorable in that the allowance could typically be assigned from an earlier effective date.  

V.ii.4.A.6.n.  Provision of Due Process for Reducing or Discontinuing Awards Under 38 CFR 3.114(b)

Under 38 CFR 3.114(b), VA must provide due process if a new law, regulation, change in the interpretation of a law, or issue requires VA to reduce or discontinue benefits that were properly authorized under instructions in effect at the time the award was processed.  VA must
send the claimant a written notice of proposed adverse action, and
allow 60 days for the claimant to submit evidence showing why the change should not be made.
Make the proposed change effective the first of the month following the date on which the 60-day due process period ends, unless VA receives evidence within 65 days of the date of the notice of proposed adverse action that shows VA should nottake the proposed action.
 
Reference:  For more information on due process procedures and requirements, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.B.

V.ii.4.A.6.o.  Example of Staged Rating Impacted by 38 CFR 3.114

Facts:  A Veteran with verified in-country service in Vietnam submits an original claim for SC for type 2 diabetes mellitus on January 1, 2014, along with evidence dated January 1, 1999, showing confirmed diagnosis of diet-controlled diabetes.  A VA examination conducted on February 3, 2014, shows the Veteran uses insulin. 
 
Analysis:  As all of the entitling criteria for a grant of SC were met as of the date of the law change to recognize type 2 diabetes mellitus as a presumptive disability associated with herbicide exposure, per 38 CFR 3.114(a)(3), a one-year retroactive effective date is warranted for the grant of SC.  Thus, SC is granted January 1, 2013.  A 10-percent evaluation is warranted from January 1, 2013, since the evidence shows only diet-controlled diabetes.  Effective February 3, 2014, the first time the evidence showed the requirement for insulin, a 20-percent evaluation is warranted. 

V.ii.4.A.6.p.  Applicability of Revised Rating Schedule Criteria

When VA issues a regulatory amendment to the rating schedule while an initial or increased rating claim is pending, and that amendment is more favorable to the claimant than the prior regulation, VA should apply the
more favorable regulation to rate the disability for periods from and after the effective date of the change, and
prior regulation to rate the disability for earlier periods. 
Refer to the table below for the three-step analysis involved in deciding the claim for increased rating in situations in which the rating criteria is revised during the pendency of the claim.
  
Step
Action
1
Determine whether the intervening change is more favorable to the Veteran.  This may require application of each version of the regulation to the facts of the case unless it is clear from the face of both versions of the regulation that the change is more favorable.
 
If the revised criteria are
more favorable, go to Step 2, or
not more favorable, then evaluate the claim for increased rating under the prior version of the regulation.
2
Apply the more favorable amended regulation to rate the disability for periods from and after the effective date of the regulatory change.
3
Apply the prior regulation to rate the disability for periods preceding the effective date of the regulatory change.
 
References:  For more information on
the analysis required to determine whether revised rating schedule criteria allows for retroactive applicability, see VAOPCGCPREC 3-2000
evaluating disabilities following rating schedule readjustment, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.i, and
potential liberalization associated with the revision of the criteria for rating psychiatric disorders which became effective February 3, 1988, see VAOPGCPREC 9-1992.

 7.  Effective Dates Based on Judicial Precedents or General Counsel Opinions

Introduction

This topic includes information clarifying the principles for determining effective dates when a decision is impacted by a precedential judicial decision or a decision of the Office of General Counsel, including
effective dates based on judicial precedents
example of effective date based on judicial precedent
pending claim
prior decision not final
liberalizing regulation, and
no regulatory change, and
effective dates based on General Counsel opinions. 

Change Date

June 27, 2022

V.ii.4.A.7.a.  Effective Dates Based on Judicial Precedents 

A precedential decision by CAVC, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, or the U.S. Supreme Court that affects a statute, regulation, or other VA rule is legally binding upon VA effective the date of the issuance of the decision.  The effect of such a decision may result in different effective dates for different classes of claimants with regard to the issue decided.
 
A court’s decision is not a liberalizing issue for purposes of application of 38 CFR 3.114.  However, if CAVC’s decision results in an amendment to a regulation or statute, then the claimant or appellant may be entitled to retroactive disability or death benefits under the provision of 38 CFR 3.114(a).  When regulatory revision results, the claimant may receive retroactive benefits for a period of up to one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim, but no earlier than the effective date of the amended regulation or statue.
 
Refer to the table below to determine the impact of a judicial precedent on an effective date.
  
If the claim ...
Then ...
is pending at a regional office (RO), Board of Veterans’ Appeals, or before a court on the date a precedent decision is issued
the ruling of the court must be considered in deciding the pending claim.
 
If the decision is favorable, the effective date may go as far back as the date the pending claim was received unless a specific provision, law, or regulation provides for an earlier date. 
is received on or after the date of issuance of the court decision which has a bearing on that claim
the claim must be decided under the provisions of the court’s ruling.
 
If a favorable decision is made, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim unless a specific provision of law or regulation provides for an earlier date.
became final prior to the date of issuance of the court decision
the prior decision is not subject to review under the provisions of the court’s ruling. 
 
Decisions may not be challenged on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) based solely on the provisions of the court’s ruling.
A new claim must be filed on or after the date of the court’s decision to allow for consideration under the provisions of the court’s ruling.  If a favorable decision is made, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim unless a specific provision, law, or regulation provides for an earlier effective date.
 
Notes: 
Court decisions invalidating VA regulations or statutory interpretations do not have retroactive effect in relation to prior claim decisions that are now finally adjudicated under 38 CFR 3.160(d).  However, court decisions relating to pending claims may be applied retroactive to the date of the court holding.
VA may only stay the binding effect of a precedential decision of CAVC if it files a motion for stay with the court that rendered the decision.
When there is an interim period between the issuance of a precedential holding and the publication of associated procedural guidance, any decision made during the interim period that fails to implement the precedential holding, such that a manifestly different decision would result based on the holding, should be corrected with a finding of CUE. 
References:  For more information on
precedential court decisions, see
M21-5, Chapter 7, Section I, 1.e
VAOPGCPREC 7-2003, and
Ramsey et al v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 16 (2006), and
review of prior final decisions based on court decisions, see
VAOPGCPREC 9-1994, and
VAOPCGCPREC 10-1994.

V.ii.4.A.7.b.  Example:  Effective Date Based on Judicial Precedent:  Pending Claim

Facts:  In Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994), CAVC liberally interpreted VA’s rule against pyramiding in a manner favorable to the claimant.
 
On September 1, 1993, a Veteran submitted a claim for an increased evaluation for an SC facial injury.  The claim was still pending on the date of CAVC’s decision for Esteban v. Brown. 
 
Analysis:  An increased evaluation was granted based solely upon the Estebandecision for the residuals of the facial injury because the Veteran’s condition met the criteria for the increased evaluation.
 
The effective date in this case is September 1, 1993, the date of claim since the claim was pending on the date of the precedential decision.  The assignment of the effective date is not limited to the date of the CAVC decision since it did not result in a liberalizing regulation.

V.ii.4.A.7.c.  Example:  Effective Date Based on Judicial Precedent:  Prior Decision Not Final

Facts:  In Petitti v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 415 (2015), CAVC liberally interpreted VA’s regulation at 38 CFR 4.59 concerning assignment of a compensable evaluation based on painful motion for a joint. 
 
On January 22, 2015, the Veteran claimed SC for a right knee condition.  SC was granted for chronic right knee strain with a 0-percent evaluation.  The VA examination revealed no objective evidence of painful motion on examination.  No other objective evidence of painful motion was of record.  The Veteran was notified on June 13, 2015, of a grant of SC with a 0-percent evaluation assigned.
 
On February 11, 2016, the Veteran’s authorized representative submitted a request to reconsider the 0-percent evaluation in connection with the CAVC holding in Petitti.  The evidence of record at the time of the non-final decision to assign a 0-percent evaluation did include credible lay evidence of painful motion.
 
Analysis:  As the June 13, 2015, decision was not final at the time of the October 28, 2015, CAVC Petitti holding, the ruling of CAVC must be considered in deciding the pending request for reconsideration.  Accordingly, as the holding allows for assignment of the higher 10-percent evaluation based on credible lay evidence of painful motion, the prior decision must be reconsidered and a 10-percent evaluation assigned effective January 22, 2015, the date of receipt of the prior, non-final claim.  The assignment of the effective date is not limited to the date of the CAVC decision since it did not result in a liberalizing regulation.

V.ii.4.A.7.d.  Example:  Effective Date Based on Judicial Precedent:  Liberalizing Regulation

Facts:  In Gregory v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 108 (1993), CAVC invalidated portions of 38 CFR 3.53(a).  VA subsequently published an amendment to that regulation that implemented CAVC’s holding with an effective date of the regulation retroactive to May 13, 1993, the date of CAVC’s decision.  On June 1, 1994, the surviving spouse, who had a final decision denying benefits in 1985 due to reliance on the now invalidated regulation, filed a claim.
 
Analysis:  Because VA issued liberalizing regulations to implement the decision, the
provisions of 38 CFR 3.114(a) must be applied, and
appropriate effective date is June 1, 1993, one year prior to date of claim.  

V.ii.4.A.7.e.  Example:  Effective Date Based on Judicial Precedent: No Regulatory Change

Facts:  Although CAVC’s decision in Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994), liberally interpreted VA’s rule against pyramiding in a manner favorable to the claimant, VA determined that no regulatory changes were required as a result of that decision.
 
On June 10, 1994, a Veteran submitted a claim for an increased evaluation for residuals of an SC facial injury.  The claim was received after the date of the Esteban decision. 
 
Analysis:  Based solely on CAVC’s decision, the evaluation of the facial injury was increased effective June 10, 1994, the date of receipt of claim.
 
The provisions of 38 CFR 3.114(a) do not apply.  No retroactive award is warranted because CAVC decisions are not liberalizing issues for purposes of a retroactive effective date.

V.ii.4.A.7.f.  Effective Dates Based on General Counsel Opinions

In most instances, General Counsel opinions interpret statutes and regulations and thus generally clarify existing law rather than change law.  Consequently, they usually do not represent changes in law or VA issue for the purposes of application of 38 CFR 3.114. 
 
However, on occasion a General Counsel opinion may conclude that a prior VA interpretation of the law was erroneous and announce a new interpretation for future use.  Such an opinion would constitute a change in law or VA issue for purposes of application of 38 CFR 3.114. 
 
Reference:  For more information on applicability of 38 CFR 3.114 associated with General Counsel opinions, see VAOPGCPREC 88-1990.

8.  Claims for Earlier Effective Dates

Introduction

This topic includes information clarifying the principles for determining effective dates when a decision is impacted by new guidance, including
requests for an earlier effective date, and
processing freestanding requests for an earlier effective date. 

Change Date

February 19, 2019 

V.ii.4.A.8.a.  Requests for an Earlier Effective Date

In Rudd v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 296 (2006), CAVC held that VA has no authority to adjudicate a “freestanding” request for an earlier effective date associated with an RO decision that has become finally adjudicated under 38 CFR 3.160(d).
 
Although VA cannot consider a request for an earlier effective date on a finally adjudicated RO decision, the claimant may allege CUE with respect to the assignment of the effective date in that prior decision.  For the CUE claim to be considered valid, the claimant must specify the factual or legal errors at issue. 
 
Example:  A claimant’s statement that “my effective date is wrong, or “I want an earlier effective date” does not sufficiently specify the factual or legal error at issue.
 
References:  For more information on
processing freestanding requests for an earlier effective date, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.8.b
revising decisions based on CUE, see
38 CFR 3.105(a), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A
prescribed forms for a specific benefit, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a.

V.ii.4.A.8.b.  Processing Freestanding Requests for an Earlier Effective Date

Use the table below to determine how to process a freestanding request for an earlier effective date.
If the request for an earlier effective date...
Then ...
alleges a CUE, and
specifies the factual or legal error(s) at issue
process the request in accordance with M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A.2.a and b.
does not allege a CUE, or
alleges a CUE but does notspecify the factual or legal error(s) at issue
respond to the request in accordance with M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A.2.c.
References:  For more information on
requests for an earlier effective date, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.8.a
revising decisions based on CUE, see 38 CFR 3.105(a), and
prescribed forms for a specific benefit, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, Chapter 4, Section B - Historical Guidance on the Assignment of Effective Dates
Article ID: 554400000180493
Updated May 27, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Effective Dates Based on Historical 38 CFR 3.157
2
Effective Dates Based on Historical 38 CFR 3.155


  
1.  Effective Dates Based on Historical 38 CFR 3.157

Introduction

This topic includes information explaining the historical relevance of and clarifying the principles for determining effective dates under historical 38 CFR 3.157, including
applicability of 38 CFR 3.157
effective dates for claims under 38 CFR 3.157
continuing impact of 38 CFR 3.157 on the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) or uniformed service facility records, and
holdings and opinions relevant to application of 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1). 

Change Date

September 22, 2017 

V.ii.4.B.1.a.  Applicability of 38 CFR 3.157

38 CFR 3.157 is a historical regulation that provided that evidence of examination or hospitalization may be accepted as an informal claim for increase or to reopen. 
This regulation was eliminated on March 24, 2015, in association with the Standards Claims and Appeals Forms Rule. 
However, 38 CFR 3.157 applies, with multiple revisions dating back to 1933, until its 2015 elimination.  Thus, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) or uniformed service health care facility records dating within that time period continue to be potential informal claims for increase or to reopen without regard to when those records are incorporated into a claims folder.  The correct assignment of effective dates is contingent on properly recognizing these informal claims.
Reference:  For more information on informal claims accepted under 38 CFR 3.157, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.1.

V.ii.4.B.1.b.  Effective Dates for Claims Under 38 CFR 3.157

As assignment of effective date is often determined by the date of receipt of a claim, it is important to understand that 38 CFR 3.157 was a rule that defined what may be accepted as an informal claim as well as when the claim is considered received. 
 
Particularly, 38 CFR 3.157 directed that informal claims based on receipt of
reports of examination or hospitalization at a VA or uniformed services facility are considered received as of the
date of the outpatient or hospital examination, or
date of hospital admission, and
records showing evidence of entitlement submitted by or on behalf of a Veteran from a private physician or layman or from state or other institutions are considered received as of the date of receipt of the evidence.
The following types of informal claims may result from receipt of reports of examination or hospitalization under 38 CFR 3.157:
a claim for increased compensation, including when the
Veteran has elected to received military retired pay in lieu of compensation, or
service-connected (SC) disabilities are evaluated as non-compensable
a claim for increased pension benefits (including when the Veteran has elected to received military retired pay in lieu of pension), and
a claim to reopen pension following denial resulting from a finding that the disability was not permanently and totally disabling.

V.ii.4.B.1.c.  Continuing Impact of 38 CFR 3.157 on VA or Uniformed Service Facility Records

Although 38 CFR 3.157 was removed, it continues to have the potential to impact claims processing and assignment of effective dates. 
 
Its continued effect means, in part, that any report of examination or hospitalization from a VA or uniformed services facility dated prior to March 24, 2015, without regard to the date the evidence is incorporated in the claims folder, may potentially be accepted as an informal claim if the requirements as described in the regulation and within this topic are otherwise satisfied. 
 
Example:  A Veteran submitted a claim for increased evaluation of his SC diabetes on July 14, 2016.  The diabetes was evaluated as 10-percent disabling at the time the claim was received.  The resultant VA examination, dated September 22, 2016, revealed that the Veteran was following a diabetic diet and using an oral medication to treat the diabetes.  VA treatment records, incorporated into the claims folder on August 15, 2016, confirmed that the Veteran was first prescribed Metformin on February 12, 2014.
 
Analysis:  Since the VA treatment records showing the increased symptomatology of the SC disability via prescription of Metformin are dated prior to March 24, 2015, they must be accepted as an informal claim for increase in the diabetes.  The claim is considered received on the date of the outpatient examination in which the increase was shown.  Thus, the proper effective date for the increased evaluation from 10 to 20 percent for the SC diabetes is February 12, 2014, the date of receipt of the informal claim.

V.ii.4.B.1.d.  Holdings and Opinions Relevant to Application of 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1)

The following court holdings and General Counsel opinion clarify the applicability of 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1).
In MacPhee v. Nicholson, 439 F.3d 1323 (2006), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that although the language of 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1) refers to claims to reopen, in this case the claim to reopen is limited in scope for compensation purposes to those disabilities for which SC has already been established.  Medical reports concerning a disability for which SC has not been granted cannot be used to trigger application of 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1).
In Massie v. Shinseski, 724 F.3d 1325 (2013), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit made the following findings:
A physician’s letter does not qualify as a report of examination under 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1) because it was not generated in connection with any particular VA medical examination.  The medical record in question must describe the results of a specific, identifiable VA or uniform service facility outpatient or hospital examination. 
For 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1) to be considered an informal claim, the report of examination or hospitalization must demonstrate that the Veteran’s SC disability worsened since the time it was last evaluated for rating purposes.
In Munro v. Shinseki, 616 F.3d 1293 (2010), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit found that 38 CFR 3.157(b) establishes that evidence such as VA medical reports be accepted as informal claims for increased compensation, not that informal claims require separate consideration from formal claims.  Furthermore, it is not necessary for VA to address every one of these informal claims separately.  The implicit denial rule may be applied to terminate the pending status of both formal and informal claims.
In Pacheco v. Gibson, 27 Vet.App. 21 (2014), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that a previous allowance of non-service-connected (NSC) pension cannot result in an earlier effective date under 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1) for a claim to reopen a previously denied claim for SC.  Rather, a previous allowance of NSC pension can result in an earlier effective date for an increased pension claim or a claim to reopen a pension claim previously denied because the disability was not permanently and totally disabling. 
In VAOPGCPREC 5-2003, General Counsel found that the provision of 38 CFR 3.157(b)(1) stating that the date of admission to a uniform services hospital will be accepted as the date of receipt of a claim for increased benefits is applicable to Veterans hospitalized in private facilities at Department of Defense expense under the TRICARE program.

 
 2.  Effective Dates Based on Historical 38 CFR 3.155 

Introduction

This topic includes information clarifying the principles for determining effective dates under historical 38 CFR 3.155, including the applicability of
informal claims, and
38 CFR 3.114 to informal claims. 

Change Date

September 22, 2017 

V.ii.4.B.2.a.  Applicability of Informal Claims

Informal claims were authorized under 38 CFR 3.155 prior to March 24, 2015.  Although the Standard Claims and Appeals Rule revised 38 CFR 3.155 and eliminated provisions for acceptance of informal claims, informal claims may still apply when received prior to March 24, 2015.  Recognizing informal claims is important in the proper assignment of effective dates as well as in understanding historical entitlement decisions.
 
Notes:
There was no standard form for submission of an informal claim. 
Upon receipt of an informal claim, if no prior formal claim had been filed, the applicant was forwarded an application for benefits.  The applicant had one year from the date the application was sent to formalize the claim.  When formalized within the one-year period, the claim was considered filed as of the date of receipt of the informal claim. 
Informal claims for increase or reopening were accepted as claims.
References:  For more information on the 
historical criteria for informal claims, see
historical 38 CFR 3.155, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H.1, and
impact of an electronic application initiation date on an effective date determination, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.2.a.

V.ii.4.B.2.b.  Applicability of 38 CFR 3.114 to Informal Claims

When 38 CFR 3.114 applies to a disability claim and an informal claim was received prior to March 24, 2015, apply 38 CFR 3.114 based on date of receipt of the informal claim.  Under the historical 38 CFR 3.155, the claim is considered received as of the date of receipt of the informal claim.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section A - Painful Motion and Functional Loss
Article ID: 554400000014407
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Principles for Evaluating Painful Motion
2
Examples of Evaluating Painful Motion
3
Principles for Evaluating Joint Conditions and Functional Loss
4
Examples of Evaluating Joint Conditions and Functional Loss
 

 
1.  Principles for Evaluating Painful Motion 

Introduction

This topic contains principles for evaluating painful motion, including 
establishing the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59
precedential court holdings impacting 38 CFR 4.59
assessing functional loss due to pain per DeLuca v. Brown
applicability of 38 CFR 4.59 beyond arthritis per Burton v. Shinseki
assessing functional loss due to pain per Mitchell v. Shinseki
satisfactory evidence of painful motion per Petitti v. McDonald
selecting a diagnostic code (DC) and minimum compensable evaluation for 38 CFR 4.59 per Sowers v. McDonald
assessing joint disabilities for pain per Correia v. McDonald
selecting a DC for application of 38 CFR 4.59 per Southall-Norman v. McDonald
assessing medical evidence for functional loss due to pain
considering DeLuca and Mitchell results
evaluating painful motion of minor joints or joint groups under 38 CFR 4.59, and
steps for applying 38 CFR 4.59.

Change Date

September 15, 2021

V.iii.1.A.1.a.  Establishing the Minimum Compensable Evaluation Under 38 CFR 4.59 

An actually painful joint can be a basis for assignment of a compensable evaluation even though the specific criteria for a compensable evaluation listed in a diagnostic code (DC) for the joint are not met. 
 
The regulatory language at 38 CFR 4.59 provides that 
pain of a joint due to joint or periarticular (structures surrounding the joint) pathology is indicative of disability, and
an actually painful joint justifies the assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation for the joint under the applicable DC. 
Guidance for assessment of a disability to determine whether painful motion exists is also included in 38 CFR 4.59.  Particularly, this regulation
describes ways in which painful motion can be discerned, such as
facial expression
wincing, etc., on pressure of manipulation
muscle spasms, or
crepitation in tendons, ligaments, or joint structures
requires that the findings be noted in the medical evidence to assist the rating authority in assigning a disability rating that adequately accounts for painful motion, and
explains the kinds of test results that must be obtained to permit an adjudicator to assess the effect of painful motion, including range of motion (ROM) tests
for passive and active motion
in both weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing circumstances, and
for the opposite undamaged joint for comparison purposes, if possible.
Notes: 
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5002 and 5003 (and several other DCs that incorporate the criteria from those DCs by reference) provide that where limitation of motion (LOM) of joint(s) is noncompensable under DCs specific to the involved joint(s), a compensable evaluation can be assigned for the LOM if objectively confirmed by findings such as satisfactory evidence of painful motion.  In contrast, 38 CFR 4.59 provides an alternate basis for assigning a compensable evaluation for disabilities rated under those DCs on the basis of credible lay evidence of painful motion. The minimum compensable evaluation may be assigned under 38 CFR 4.59 based on subjective painful motion, and does not require objective evidence of painful motion.
Multiple precedential court decisions have impacted the application of 38 CFR 4.59, as discussed at M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.b-k.  These holdings must be applied in determining whether the minimum compensable evaluation for a disability based on painful motion is warranted under 38 CFR 4.59.
Reference:  For more information on considering painful motion when assigning multiple LOM evaluations for a joint, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.e.

V.iii.1.A.1.b.  Precedential Court Holdings Impacting 38 CFR 4.59 

Multiple precedential decisions have impacted the application of 38 CFR 4.59.  Refer to the table below for a listing of impactful precedential court holdings, a brief description of the impact, and the applicability date (date of decision) for each.  More detailed explanations for each holding and its impact on the application of 38 CFR 4.59 in claims processing can be found in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.c-i. 
Holding
Summary of Impact
Date of Decision
DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995)
Clarified exam requirements to assess the impact of pain on functional impairment including additional loss of motion due to pain.
December 22, 1995
Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 1 (2011)
38 CFR 4.59 is not limited in applicability to arthritis claims.
August 4, 2011
Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32 (2011)
Clarified 
exam requirements for assessing impact of painful motion with use and during flare-ups, and
that when assigning a disability evaluation based on loss of ROM, painful motion is not considered the same as limited motion unless the pain actually causes a loss of motion.
August 23, 2011
Petitti v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 415 (2015)
38 CFR 4.59 does not require objective evidence of painful motion for assignment of a minimal compensable evaluation for a joint.
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5002does require objective evidence of painful motion. 
October 28, 2015
Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 472 (2016)
38 CFR 4.59 is 
limited by the DC applicable to the claimant’s disability, and
inapplicable to a DC that does not provide a compensable evaluation.
 
Note:  The Sowers holding influenced a subsequent policy decision to assign the minimum compensable evaluation under the corresponding DC for painful motion under 38 CFR 4.59.
February 12, 2016
 
Note:  The policy decision to assign the minimum compensable evaluation under the corresponding DC for painful motion under 38 CFR 4.59 is effective May 23, 2016.
Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 158 (2016)
Clarified exam requirements for ROM testing to evaluate joint disabilities for painful motion in weight-bearing, nonweight-bearing, with active and passive motion, and in comparison to the opposite joint.
Directed that pain with passive motion (even in the absence of another indication of painful motion) is sufficient to satisfy the criteria for entitlement to the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59.
July 5, 2016
Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 346 (2016)
38 CFR 4.59 is not limited to DCs involving limited ROM.
 December 15, 2016
Reference:  For more information on assignment of effective dates associated with precedential court decisions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.7.

V.iii.1.A.1.c.  Assessing Functional Loss Due to Pain Per Deluca v. Brown

DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995), held that in examinations of musculoskeletal disabilities, the examiner must be asked to give an opinion on whether pain could significantly limit functional ability during flare-ups or with repeated use over a period of time.
 
This information must be portrayed in terms of the degree of additional ROM lost due to pain on use or during flare-ups.  
 
Impact on application of 38 CFR 4.59: 
Examinations must address the DeLuca criteria.
The DeLuca holding is not limited in impact to painful motion.  The holding impacts consideration of functional impairment due to pain and other factors as discussed in 38 CFR 4.40, 38 CFR 4.45, and M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.
Decision makers must properly assess the DeLuca findings in conjunction with 38 CFR 4.40, 38 CFR 4.45, and 38 CFR 4.59.  The disability is evaluated based on most severe loss of motion due to pain or following repetitive motion testing.
The Deluca decision was effective December 22, 1995.
Note:  The DeLuca holding had limited impact on the application of 38 CFR 4.59other than the fact that it may elicit evidence concerning the presence of pain.  However, DeLuca does impact application of 38 CFR 4.40 and 38 CFR 4.45.  DeLuca also clarified that the plain language of 38 CFR 4.45 does not limit the evaluation criteria contained therein to muscle injuries. 
 
Reference:  For more information on assessing examinations for adequacy in conjunction with DeLuca and associated holdings on ROM and functional loss, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.j and k, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.f and g.

V.iii.1.A.1.d.  Applicability of 38 CFR 4.59 Beyond Arthritis Per Burton v. Shinseki 

Although the first sentence of 38 CFR 4.59 refers only to arthritis, Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 1 (2011) held that the regulation is, in fact, also applicable to joint conditions other than arthritis. 
 
Impact on application of 38 CFR 4.59: 
Do not limit assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59 to DCs involving arthritis.
The Burton holding affirmed the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) longstanding policy on the application of 38 CFR 4.59 to disabilities in addition to arthritis.
The Burton holding is effective August 4, 2011.

V.iii.1.A.1.e.  Assessing Functional Loss Due to Pain Per Mitchell v. Shinseki

Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32 (2011), held that pain alone does not constitute a functional loss under VA regulations that evaluate disability based upon ROM loss.  Thus, when assigning a disability evaluation based on loss of ROM, painful motion is not considered the same as limited motion unless the pain actually causes a loss of motion.
 
Furthermore
if pain is associated with movement, the examiner must give an opinion on whether pain could significantly limit functional ability during flare-ups or when the joint is used repeatedly over a period of time, and
the opinion must, if feasible, be expressed in terms of the degree of additional ROM loss due to pain on use or during flare-ups. 
Impact on application of 38 CFR 4.59: 
Examinations must address the Mitchell criteria. 
When painful motion on repeated use over time or during a flare-up results in additional loss of ROM, then the condition should be evaluated based on the additional loss of ROM.
ROM must be actually limited.  Do not assign an evaluation for loss of ROM based on the point at which pain accompanies motion unless the pain actually causes reduced ROM on objective assessment.
The Mitchell holding is not limited in impact to painful motion.  The holding impacts consideration of functional impairment due to pain and other factors as discussed in 38 CFR 4.40, 38 CFR 4.45, and M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.c.
The Mitchell holding is effective August 23, 2011.
Reference:  For more information on assessing examinations for adequacy in conjunction with Mitchell and related holdings on ROM and functional loss, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.j and k, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.f and g.

V.iii.1.A.1.f.  Satisfactory Evidence of Painful Motion Per Petitti v. McDonald

Petitti v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 415 (2015), held that 38 CFR 4.59 does not require objective evidence of painful motion for assignment of a minimal compensable evaluation of a joint.  This guidance applies to all musculoskeletal disabilities irrespective of the DC that has already been assigned to the disability. 
 
Note:  Apply the historical criteria for acceptance of an informal claim under 38 CFR 3.157, as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.B.1, when a report of examination or hospitalization at a VA or uniform services facility shows worsening of the disability evidenced by the onset of painful motion of a service-connected (SC) disability evaluated as noncompensable on before March 24, 2015.
 
Impact on application of 38 CFR 4.59: 
Under 38 CFR 4.59, objective evidence of painful motion is not required for assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation for the musculoskeletal disability.  Lay evidence of painful motion is sufficient. 
Lay testimony may consist of a Veteran’s own statement to the extent that the statement describes symptoms capable of lay observation. 
Lay testimony may consist of a description by another person detailing observations of a Veteran’s difficulty walking, standing, sitting, or undertaking other activity.
The following are examples (not an all-inclusive list) of symptoms sufficient to assign the minimum compensable evaluation for the joint under 38 CFR 4.59:
pain with weight-bearing or nonweight-bearing
pain with passive ROM
pain reported during repeated use, or
pain reported during flare-ups.
The following are examples (not an all-inclusive list) of symptoms that can support a claimant’s report of painful motion but are not sufficient evidence, by themselves, to support assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59:
crepitus/joint crepitation (a clinical sign of a crackling or grating feeling or sound in a joint), and
pain on palpation.
An examiner’s opinion that painful motion would be present with repeated use over time or during flare-ups (as required in the Mitchell opinion) may be sufficient lay evidence to support a finding of painful motion, if found credible.
A finding of painful motion under 38 CFR 4.59 based on lay or subjective reporting of pain is contingent on a credibility assessment as discussed at M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.2.b.
Prior to the Petitti holding, longstanding VA policy was that objective evidence of painful motion was required to assign the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59.
The Petitti holding is effective October 28, 2015. 
References:  For more information on 
assignment of effective dates associated with informal claims accepted under historical 38 CFR 3.157, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.B.1, and
the requirement for a showing of worsening of a disability for application of historical 38 CFR 3.157, see Massie v. Shinseki, 724 F.3d 1325 (2013).

V.iii.1.A.1.g.  Selecting a DC and Minimum Compensable Evaluation for 38 CFR 4.59 Per Sowers v. McDonald

Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 472 (2016), held that 38 CFR 4.59 is limited by the DC applicable to the claimant’s disability, and where that DC does not provide a compensable rating, 38 CFR 4.59 does not apply.
 
Example:  Painful motion of a right ring finger fracture that is rated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5230 would not receive a compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59because this DC does not contain a compensable evaluation.
 
Important:  Sowers did not specifically hold that the minimum compensable evaluation must be assigned under the applicable DC for the disability involved.  However, the holding did influence a subsequent policy determination that the minimum compensable evaluation under the DC must be assigned when painful motion is demonstrated under 38 CFR 4.59.  This policy is effective May 23, 2016.
This policy particularly affects painful motion of the shoulder evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201.  Under this DC, painful motion of the shoulder warrants assignment of a 20-percent evaluation.
This decision represents a change in longstanding VA policy in which the minimum compensable evaluation was interpreted as a 10-percent evaluation irrespective of the DC involved.
Impact on application of 38 CFR 4.59:
Effective February 12, 2016, the Sowers holding requires that 38 CFR 4.59 must be applied based on the DC applicable to the disability.  In other words, the DC most appropriate to the disability being evaluated must be selected, and then 38 CFR 4.59 must be applied accordingly.
Effective May 23, 2016, the minimum compensable evaluation refers to the lowest evaluation specified under the DC most applicable to the disability.

V.iii.1.A.1.h.  Assessing Joint Disabilities for Pain Per Correia v. McDonald 

Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 158 (2016), held that the final sentence of 38 CFR 4.59 requires that certain ROM testing be conducted to assess for pain whenever possible in evaluating joint disabilities.  Particularly, 
the joints involved must be tested for pain
on both active and passive motion, and
in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing, and
the ROM of the opposite, undamaged joint must be assessed for comparison, if possible.
Correia also held that pain with passive motion, and not just active motion, warrants entitlement to the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59.
 
Note:  If the examiner cannot assess the motion of the opposite, undamaged joint, and an opposite joint does exist, the examiner should explain why the assessment is not possible.  Examples of situations in which ROM of the opposite, undamaged joint cannot be assessed for comparison include (but are not limited to) the
spinal disabilities, since there is no opposite joint
disabilities wherein the opposite, undamaged joint has been amputated, or
disabilities wherein the opposite joint is damaged or disabled and would not be an effective comparison to ascertain the degree of impairment of the SC joint.
Impact on application of 38 CFR 4.59:
Examinations must address the Correia criteria.
Assign the minimum compensable evaluation when there is evidence of painful motion with
active or passive motion, and/or
with weight-bearing or nonweight-bearing.
Prior to the Correia holding, longstanding Veterans Benefits Administration policy was that only pain with active motion triggers application of 38 CFR 4.59.
The Correia holding is effective July 5, 2016.

V.iii.1.A.1.i.  Selecting a DC for Application of 38 CFR 4.59 Per Southall-Norman v. McDonald

Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 346 (2016), held that 38 CFR 4.59 is 
not limited to the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities under DCs predicated upon ROM measurements, and
applicable to the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities involving actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints or periarticular regions, regardless of whether the DC under which the disability is evaluated is predicated upon ROM measurements.
Examples:
38 CFR 4.59 supports assignment of a 10-percent evaluation where great/first toe malalignment (hallux valgus) is actually painful, even though the regulatory criteria of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5280 do not mention ROM and the specified 10-percent criteria under that DC (operated with resection of the metatarsal head or severe, if equivalent to amputation of the great toe) are not met.  Refer to M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.l for more information on the application of 38 CFR 4.59 to 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5280.
38 CFR 4.59 supports assignment of a 10-percent evaluation where there is pain from a flat foot or feet (pes planus) even though the regulatory criteria of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276 do not specifically mention ROM, the specified 10-percent criteria under that DC are not met, and the DC provides for a lower, 0 percent, evaluation.  Refer to M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.e for more information on the application of 38 CFR 4.59 to 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276.
Impact on application of 38 CFR 4.59:
When musculoskeletal disability involves joint or periarticular pathology that is painful, 38 CFR 4.59 is applicable when painful motion is present without regard to whether the DC used for evaluation involves ROM.
The Southall-Norman holding represents a change to longstanding VA policy which directed that 38 CFR 4.59 applies only to DCs involving ROM.
The Southall-Norman holding is effective December 15, 2016.

V.iii.1.A.1.j.  Assessing Medical Evidence for Functional Loss Due to Pain

Medical evidence used to evaluate functional impairment due to pain must account for painful motion, pain on use, and pain during flare-ups or with repeated use over a period of time.
 
As a part of the assessment conducted in accordance with DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995), the medical evidence must
clearly indicate the exact degree of movement at which pain limits motion in the affected joint, and
include the findings of at least three repetitions of ROM.
Per Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32 (2011), when pain is associated with movement, an examiner must opine or the medical evidence must show whether pain could significantly limit functional ability
during flare-ups, or
when the joint is used repeatedly over a period of time, and 
if there is functional impairment found during flare-ups or with repeated use over a period of time, the examiner must provide, if feasible, the degree of additional LOM due to pain on use or during flare-ups.
Per Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 158 (2016)
the joints involved must be tested for pain
on both active and passive motion, and
in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing, and
if possible, the ROM of the opposite, undamaged joint must be assessed for comparison.
Important:  
If the examiner cannot provide any of the above findings the report must
indicate that the examiner cannot determine, without resort to mere speculation, whether any of these factors cause additional functional loss, and
provide rationale for this opinion.  
An examiner’s statement that speculation is required is, itself, a medical opinion that must be supported by adequate rationale.  A review of the claims folder and consideration of all procurable and relevant information must be demonstrated as discussed in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.r.
References:  For more information on 
reviewing musculoskeletal examination reports for sufficiency, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.f-h
the requirement for claims folder review for musculoskeletal examinations involving one or more joints, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.8.b, and
handling an examiner’s statement than an opinion would be speculative, see
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.r
Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet.App. 382 (2010), and
Sharp v. Shulkin 29 Vet.App. 26 (2017).

V.iii.1.A.1.k.  Considering DeLuca and Mitchell Results

The findings of DeLuca repetitive ROM testing or the functional loss expressed in the Mitchell opinion will be used to evaluate the functional impairment of a joint due to pain. 
Only the most advantageous finding will be utilized to evaluate the joint condition.
Do not “add” the LOM on DeLuca exam to the LOM expressed in a Mitchell opinion.
References:  For more information on
the Deluca holding, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.c, and
DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995)
the Mitchell holding, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.e, and
Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32 (2011), and
evaluating joint conditions and functional loss, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.

V.iii.1.A.1.l.  Evaluating Painful Motion of Minor Joints or Joint Groups Under 38 CFR 4.59

The determining factor as to whether a minimum compensable evaluation may be assigned under 38 CFR 4.59 is whether the appropriate corresponding DC for the joint or periarticular region involved includes a compensable evaluation, as demonstrated in Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 472 (2016).
 
38 CFR 4.59 does not include a specific provision limiting application to major joints or provisions for how to consider groups of minor joints.  Thus, major joint involvement or multiple minor joint involvement is not a factor in determining whether a minimum compensable evaluation may be assigned under 38 CFR 4.59.
 
The following principles apply when evaluating painful motion of the minor joints of the hands and feet: 
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5228 and 5229 allow for compensable evaluations for LOM of the thumb, index finger, and long finger.  Consequently, compensable evaluations are warranted for painful motion of each of these fingers.  Separate evaluations must be assigned for each SC digit evaluated under these DCs affected by painful motion.  
Painful motion of multiple toes of one foot due to injuries is most appropriately evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284 since there is no specific code for evaluation of injuries of single toes.  A single evaluation is warranted for a single foot, whether it is affected by one or more painful toes or other painful joints of the foot.  The minimum compensable evaluation for this DC is 10 percent.  Therefore, a single 10-percent evaluation is warranted for painful motion of one of more toes or other joints in a foot due to injury.
Do not routinely utilize 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5280 to evaluate painful motion of the first toe.
Assignment of a 10-percent evaluation for painful motion of the first toe under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5280 is appropriate only when the disability being evaluated is hallux valgus or another disability that is most appropriately analogously evaluated as hallux valgus (as required in the Sowers holding).
Assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation for painful motion due to hammertoes evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5282 requires involvement of all five toes unless the hammertoes are due to injury, in which case the painful motion of less than five toes could be alternatively evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284.
Note:  The definition of joint that is reliant on the distinction of major and minor joints at 38 CFR 4.45(f) is applicable for the purpose of rating arthritis but is notapplicable to 38 CFR 4.59.
 
References:  For more information on
the application of 38 CFR 4.45(f) for major and minor joints, see Spicer v. Shinseki, 752 F.3d 1367 (2014)
evaluating disabilities of the fingers, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.2, and
evaluating disabilities of the feet, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.5.

V.iii.1.A.1.m.  Steps for Applying 38 CFR 4.59

Refer to the table below for procedures for assessing the applicability of and applying 38 CFR 4.59. 
Step
Action
1
Determine the DC most applicable to the disability based on either
the disability and corresponding DC as specifically listed in the rating schedule, or
application of 38 CFR 4.20 for selection of the most appropriate analogous DC.
Go to Step 2.
 
Note:  Per Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 472 (2016), 38 CFR 4.59 is limited by the DC applicable to the claimant’s disability.
2
Review findings on examination to determine whether painful motion is present.  If painful motion is 
present, go to Step 3, or
not present, do not apply 38 CFR 4.59.
Note:  Per Petitti v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 415 (2015), 38 CFR 4.59 does not require objective evidence of painful motion for assignment of a minimal compensable evaluation for a joint.
3
If the DC 
involves joint or periarticular pathology, go to Step 4, or
does not involve joint or periarticular pathology, then application of 38 CFR 4.59 is not warranted. 
Note:  Per Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 346 (2016), 38 CFR 4.59 is not limited to DCs involving limited ROM.
4
Review the available evaluations under the selected DC.  If the selected DC 
allows for assignment of a compensable evaluation, then assign the minimum compensable evaluation for painful motion if other symptoms do not warrant a higher evaluation, or
does not allow for a compensable evaluation, then do not assign a compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59. 
Note:  The holding in Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 472 (2016) influenced a subsequent policy decision to assign the minimum compensable evaluation under the corresponding DC for painful motion under 38 CFR 4.59.


 
2. Examples of Evaluating Painful Motion

Introduction

This topic contains examples of evaluating painful motion under 38 CFR 4.59, including
painful motion of the shoulder
non-objective pain under 38 CFR 4.59
pain with passive ROM under 38 CFR 4.59, and
painful motion
of minor joints, and
associated with flatfoot.

Change Date

September 15, 2021

V.iii.1.A.2.a.  Painful Motion of the Shoulder

The following examples demonstrate the proper procedures for considering 38 CFR 4.59 when evaluating shoulder disabilities.
Example 1:  Assume a shoulder strain with forward elevation and abduction limited to 145 degrees with credible evidence of pain while performing each motion, starting at 140 degrees.  Assign a 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201.  Under 38 CFR 4.59 there is actually painful motion and joint or periarticular pathology (a strain).  Therefore, the intention of the rating schedule is that the decision maker will assign the minimum compensable evaluation provided under the DC appropriate to the disability at issue.  The lowest specified compensable evaluation for shoulder motion under the DC is 20 percent. 
Example 2:  Assume the same facts as in Example 1 but the diagnosis is traumatic arthritis of the shoulder based on x-rays.  Assign a 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010-5201 with application of 38 CFR 4.59.  The ROM does not meet the criteria for a 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201because arm motion is not limited at shoulder height.  However, pursuant to 38 CFR 4.59 there is actually painful motion and joint or periarticular pathology (arthritis).  Therefore, the intention of the rating schedule is that the decision maker will assign the minimum compensable evaluation provided under the DC appropriate to the disability at issue.  The lowest specified compensable evaluation for shoulder motion under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201 is 20 percent. 
Example 3:  Assume the same facts as in Example 2 except that there was no pain on motion and the arthritis is degenerative rather than traumatic.  There was a minor amount of swelling of the shoulder.  Assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.  There is x-ray evidence of degenerative arthritis and motion that is noncompensable under the applicable DC.  There is no indication of painful motion, so 38 CFR 4.59 is not applicable.  Under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, LOM must be “objectively confirmed” by findings such as swelling, spasm, or satisfactory evidence of painful motion.  In this case there was objective evidence supporting the LOM – namely the minor swelling of the shoulder.

V.iii.1.A.2.b.  Non-Objective Pain Under 38 CFR 4.59

Example 1:  On examination, a claimant reports current symptoms of regular pain of the right knee (particularly when fully straightening the knee) that is worsened with increased activity.  The examiner finds normal ROM without pain on examination.  Repetitive motion testing produces no evidence of pain or loss of motion.  The assessment is right knee strain.  Assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.  The claimant’s reports of joint pain are found to be credible.  There is no basis to reject the complaints of pain as lacking in credibility.  38 CFR 4.59 does not require objective evidence of painful motion.  The claimant’s statement establishes that there is actually painful motion of the joint, even though it was not objectively verified on VA examination.
 
Example 2:  On examination, a claimant reports constant pain of the left elbow (particularly when bending the arm).  The examiner finds normal ROM without pain on examination. Repetitive motion testing produces no evidence of pain or loss of motion.  There is no swelling or spasm. The assessment is degenerative arthritis of the left elbow corroborated by x-rays.  Assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003-5206.  The claimant’s reports of joint pain are found to be credible.  There is no basis to reject the complaints of pain as lacking in credibility.  Although 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 requires noncompensable LOM and objective confirmation of LOM by spasm, swelling, or satisfactory evidence of painful motion, 38 CFR 4.59 provides an alternative basis for a compensable evaluation and does not require objective evidence of painful motion.  The claimant’s statement establishes that there is actually painful motion of the joint, even though pain was not objectively verified on VA examination.
 
Example 3:  Start with the same facts as Example 2.  However, in this example, claimant reports significant pain on elbow motion consistently for the last year and particularly in the last week.  However, treatment records from the past year show normal, painless range of elbow motion and no history of pain at rest, or on motion.  Notably, in a VA outpatient report from two days before the VA examination, the claimant told the treating doctor that the elbow was not painful and had not been painful at all in the last year.  Continue the 0-percent evaluation.  Review of all the evidence satisfactorily demonstrates that the complaints of painful motion were not credible.  Elbow motion is not found to be actually painful.

V.iii.1.A.2.c.  Pain With Passive ROM Under 38 CFR 4.59

Service connection (SC) is established for left rotator cuff impingement.  The Veteran reports shoulder pain when lifting the left arm – particularly with repetitive motion of the arm at or above shoulder height.  The Veteran reported a feeling of weakness with repeated over the head motions like painting.  On examination, the Veteran had full active forward elevation, abduction, and external and internal rotation of the shoulder including on repeated motion.  There was no report of pain with active motion.  Passive ROM testing for impingement including the Hawkin’s Sign was positive and reproduced impingement with the guided movements at shoulder height.  Assign a 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201.  The Hawkin’s Sign is a test for pain on passive ROM.  Under 38 CFR 4.59 the shoulder is actually painful to passive ROM and there is joint or periarticular pathology (rotator cuff impingement).  The intention of the rating schedule is that the decision maker will assign the minimum compensable evaluation provided under the DC appropriate to the disability at issue.  The lowest specified compensable evaluation for limited ROM of the shoulder under the DC is 20 percent. 
 
Note:  Medical Electronic Performance Support System (EPSS) provides that a rotator cuff tear should be rated by analogy to 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5203 (clavicle or scapula, impingement of) because the rotator cuff holds the humeral head in the glenoid fossa of the scapula and consists of the muscles around the scapula.  However, 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5203 in turn provides that rather than rating impairment of the scapula by dislocation, nonunion, or malunion it may also be rated “on impairment of function of the contiguous joint.”  Medical EPSS notes that rotator cuff impingement is characterized by pain and weakness with motions at or above shoulder height and advises that there may be LOM of the arm for the purposes of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201 in cases of rotator cuff disease.  

V.iii.1.A.2.d.  Painful Motion of Minor Joints

Example 1:  Hallux valgus with painful motion of the first toe is most appropriately evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5280.  The minimum compensable evaluation for this DC is 10 percent.  Therefore, a 10-percent evaluation is warranted for painful motion of the first toe.  This is applicable only when the disability evaluated is hallux valgus or another disability warranting analogous evaluation under this DC.
 
Example 2:  Residuals of fracture of the little finger with painful motion is most appropriately evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5230.  The only possible evaluation under this DC is a 0 percent.  Therefore, a compensable evaluation cannot be assigned for painful motion of the little finger.
 
Example 3:  Painful motion due to fracture of the index or long finger is most appropriately evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5229.  The minimum compensable evaluation for this DC is 10 percent.  Therefore, a 10-percent evaluation is available for painful motion of the index finger and an additional 10-percent evaluation is warranted for painful motion of the long finger, each under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5229.

V.iii.1.A.2.e.  Painful Motion Associated With Flatfoot

Situation:  SC is warranted for flat feet under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276.  The clinical evidence shows complete relief of symptoms, including foot pain, with arch supports.  However, the record also contains credible lay reports of pain. 
 
Outcome:  Although no more than a 0-percent evaluation is warranted under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276 on the basis of complete symptom relief due to an orthotic device, application of 38 CFR 4.59 warrants assignment of a 10-percent evaluation. 
 
Rationale:  
Subjective, credible reports of painful motion trigger application of 38 CFR 4.59 pursuant to the Petitti holding.  
The criteria for assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59 are entirely independent of the criteria for evaluation under the DC.  Thus, the relief of symptoms of pain is immaterial to assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation for painful motion under 38 CFR 4.59 for pes planus or other analogously rated disabilities.
Additionally, the Southall-Norman holding requires VA to apply 38 CFR 4.59 to all musculoskeletal codes involving joint or periarticular pathology to include even those, such as 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276, that do not specifically consider LOM. 
Note:  The minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276 is a single 10 percent whether for unilateral or bilateral pes planus.  Accordingly, assignment of a single 10-percent evaluation for painful motion due to pes planus is warranted per 38 CFR 4.59 regardless of whether the painful motion is unilateral or bilateral.

  
3.  Principles for Evaluating Joint Conditions and Functional Loss
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on evaluating joint conditions and functional loss,  including
use of the terms major and minor
importance of accurate measurements in joint cases 
assigning
multiple LOM evaluations for a joint, and
a separate noncompensable evaluation when schedular 0-percent criteria are not specified
considering pain when assigning multiple LOM evaluations for a joint
ankylosis of the joints
functional equivalence of ankylosis
evaluating
joint replacement and resurfacing, and
residuals of joint resurfacing
severe painful motion following joint replacement, and
use of active ROM findings.

Change Date

May 10, 2024

V.iii.1.A.3.a.  Use of the Terms Major and Minor

The use of the terms major and minor joint in 38 CFR 4.45(f) applies solely to the evaluation of joint conditions affected by arthritis as discussed in Spicer v. Shinseki, 752 F.3d 1367 (2014).  These terms are applicable when evaluating any form of arthritis using the evaluation criteria at 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003. 
 
Refer to the table below for more information on the use of the terms major and minor in joint evaluations.
Type of Joint
Specific Joints Included 
major
shoulder
elbow
wrist
hip
knee, or
ankle
minor
interphalangeal joint (of the hand or foot)
a metacarpal joint (hand)
a metatarsal joint (foot)
a carpal joint (hand)
a tarsal joint (foot)
cervical vertebrae
dorsal vertebrae
lumbar vertebrae
the lumbosacral articulation, or
a sacroiliac joint
minor joint group
multiple involvements of the interphalangeal, metacarpal, and carpal joints of the same upper extremity, namely, combinations of
distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints
proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints, and/or
carpometacarpal (CMC) joints
multiple involvements of the interphalangeal, metatarsal, and tarsal joints of the same lower extremity, namely, combinations of
interphalangeal (IP) joints
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints, and/or
transverse tarsal joints
the cervical vertebrae
the dorsal (thoracic) vertebrae
the lumbar vertebrae, or
the lumbosacral articulation together with both sacroiliac joints
References:  For more information on
considering minor joints under 38 CFR 4.59, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.l
evaluations for the fingers, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.2
evaluating arthritis of the minor joints of the toes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.5.d, and
arthritis where a compensable evaluation cannot be assigned under another DC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.5.b and c.

V.iii.1.A.3.b.  Importance of Accurate Measurements in Joint Cases

Accurate measurements are very important in joint cases.  VA examinations must measure joint motion with a goniometer. 
 
A number of disability benefits questionnaires (DBQ) relating to joints require use of a goniometer.
 
Important:  There is a presumption that examiners will conduct examinations in line with examination standards.  Accordingly, treat measurements on examinations that require a goniometer as having been taken using the device unless there is clear evidence that a goniometer was not used.  Do not seek clarification of DBQs requiring goniometer use, or return the examination as insufficient, merely because the report does not explicitly refer to goniometer use.
References:  For more information on
the importance of accurate measurement of joints, see 38 CFR 4.46, and
determining the sufficiency of examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.

V.iii.1.A.3.c.  Assigning Multiple LOM Evaluations for a Joint

In VAOPGCPREC 9-2004, the Office of General Counsel held that separate evaluations under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260, (limitation of knee flexion) and 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261, (limitation of knee extension) can be assigned without pyramiding.  Despite the fact that knee flexion and extension both occur in the same plane of motion, limitation of flexion (bending the knee) and limitation of extension (straightening the knee) represent distinct disabilities. 
Important: 
The same principle and handling apply only to
qualifying elbow and forearm movement DCs, flexion (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5206), extension (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5207), and impairment of either supination or pronation (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5213), and
qualifying hip movement DCs, extension (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5251), flexion (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5252), and abduction, adduction or rotation (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5253).
Always ensure that multiple evaluations do not violate the amputation rule in 38 CFR 4.68.
Note:  Multiple evaluations for the shoulder under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201, are not permitted.  Yonek v. Shinseki, 722 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2013), held that a Veteran is entitled to a single rating under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201, even though a shoulder disability results in LOM in both flexion (raising the arm in front of the body) and abduction (raising the arm away from the side of the body).
References:  For more information on
pyramiding of evaluations, see
38 CFR 4.14, and
Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994)
painful motion in multiple evaluations for joint LOM, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.e
assignment of separate evaluations for disabilities of the elbow, forearm, and wrist, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.1.c, and
examples of actual LOM of two knee motions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.a.

V.iii.1.A.3.d.  Assigning a Separate Noncompensable Evaluation When Schedular 0-Percent Criteria Are Not Specified

When considering a separate evaluation for a motion of a joint specified in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.c, where 0-percent evaluation criteria are not provided by the DC, any LOM for that specific movement falling short of criteria for a compensable level of evaluation will be assigned a separate 0-percent evaluation.  
 
38 CFR 4.31 provides that in every instance where the schedule does not provide a 0-percent evaluation for a DC, a 0-percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.
 
The motions include
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5207, limitation of extension of the elbow
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5213, impairment of supination and pronation of the forearm
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5251, limitation of extension of the hip
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5252, limitation of flexion of the hip, and
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5253, impairment of rotation, adduction, or abduction of the hip.
Example:  Examination shows flexion of the hip limited to 60 degrees and extension limited to 5 degrees.  Normal hip ROM is from 0 degrees (fully extended) to 125 degrees (fully flexed).  The limitation of extension to 5 degrees is rated 10 percent under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5251.  38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5252 (limitation of flexion) does not list criteria for a 0-percent evaluation, but a 10-percent evaluation requires flexion limited to 45 degrees.  Because there is limited flexion not meeting the 10-percent criteria and there is no defined schedular 0-percent evaluation criteria, a 0-percent evaluation is warranted for limited flexion of the hip under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5252.

V.iii.1.A.3.e.  Considering Pain When Assigning Multiple LOM Evaluations for a Joint

When considering the role of pain in evaluations for multiple motions of a single joint, the following guidelines apply.
When more than one qualifying joint motion is actually limited to a compensable degree and there is painful but otherwise noncompensable limitation of the complementary movement(s), only one compensable evaluation can be assigned. 
Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011) reinforced that painful motion is the equivalent of limited motion only based on the specific language and structure of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, not for the purpose of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260, and 38 CFR 4.71a, 5261.  For degenerative arthritis, if one motion is actually compensable under its 52XX-series DC, then a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 is not available and the complementary motion cannot be treated as limited at the point where it is painful. 
38 CFR 4.59 does not permit separate compensable evaluations for each painful joint motion.  It only provides that VA policy is to recognize actually painful motion as entitled to at least the minimum compensable evaluation for the joint.
When each qualifying joint motion is painful but motion is not actually limited to a compensable degree under its applicable 52XX-series DC, only one compensable evaluation can be assigned.
Assigning multiple compensable evaluations for pain is pyramiding. 
A joint affected by arthritis, excluding post-traumatic arthritis, established by x-ray may be evaluated as 10-percent disabling under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003. 
For common joint conditions that are not evaluated under the degenerative arthritis criteria such as a knee strain or chondromalacia patella, a 10-percent evaluation can be assigned for the joint based on pain on motion under 38 CFR 4.59.  Do not apply instructions from Note (1) under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, for non- degenerative arthritis conditions, since the instructions are strictly limited to degenerative arthritis.  See an example in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.f.
References:  For more information on 
assigning multiple evaluations for a single joint, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.c, and
examples of evaluations for which one or both joint motions are not actually limited to a compensable degree but there is painful motion, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.4.b and c.

V.iii.1.A.3.f.  Ankylosis of the Joints

Ankylosis is a condition of, or term used for the sign/symptom of, abnormal stiffness, immobility, or abnormal bending of a joint.  It is a stiffness or immobility in a joint caused by bones fusing as a result of disease or injury or by intentional fusion through surgery.
 
Favorable ankyloses is fixation of a joint in a neutral position (at 0 degrees).
 
Unfavorable ankyloses is fixation of a joint in flexion or extension that results in significant functional impairment. 
Reference:  For more information on spinal ankylosis, see the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine at 38 CFR 4.71a (affiliated with DCs 5235-5243), Notes 5 and 6.

V.iii.1.A.3.g.  Functional Equivalence of Ankylosis

38 CFR 4.40 and 4.45 apply when considering whether LOM results in the functional equivalence of ankylosis of the joint.
 
The functional equivalence of ankylosis arises when application of the
effect of pain or other factors identified under 38 CFR 4.40 or 4.45, to include during flare-ups and repetitive use over time, results in additional loss of motion to the joint that effectively results in functional impairment consistent with ankylosis.
 
Reference:  For more information on the functional equivalence of ankylosis, see Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet.App. 1 (2021).

V.iii.1.A.3.h.  Evaluating Joint Replacement and Resurfacing

Joint replacement and resurfacing are evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5051-5056.
There are important similarities between joint resurfacing and prosthetic joint replacement.  Joint resurfacing takes about the same time to perform and the recovery/rehabilitation periods are similar to comparable prosthetic joint replacement.
There are significant differences with joint resurfacing that lead to less residual disability.  These differences include the following factors:
Joint resurfacing preserves more of the original anatomy.
In most cases, joint resurfacing restores more of the original joint function than the prosthetic joint replacement.
Refer to the table below for a comparison of policies and procedures applicable to joint replacements and resurfacing.
Policy/Procedure
Replacement
Resurfacing
applicable joints
shoulder
elbow
wrist
hip
knee, and
ankle
hip, and
knee
length of temporary total evaluation
one month under 38 CFR 4.30, then
four months for knee or hip, and
12 months for other joints
one month under 38 CFR 4.30, then
four months for knee or hip
evaluation following temporary 100 percent
provided by the rating schedule under the joint replacement/resurfacing DC, or
evaluated based on residuals under the DCs applicable for the joint (for all joints except the hip)
not provided by the rating schedule under the joint replacement/resurfacing DC, but
evaluated based on residuals under the DCs applicable for the joint
review examination following temporary 100 percent
not routinely warranted
routinely warranted
separate evaluations for the same joint under 38 CFR 4.71a
cannot be assigned during the temporary 100 percent or when the residuals are evaluated under a DC for joint replacement
cannot be assigned during the temporary 100 percent, but
can be assigned after cessation of the evaluation assigned under the joint resurfacing code
separate evaluations for residuals not evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a
can be assigned
can be assigned
Note:  Follow applicable due process and protected evaluation procedures when the combined evaluation for the joint is greater pre-surgically than it will be following surgery.
Important:  VA published an interpretative rule effective July 16, 2015, revising 38 CFR 4.71a to add a note stating that the term “prosthetic replacement” as used in 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5051-5056 means “total replacement of the named joint” except that in 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5054 it means “total replacement of the head of the femur or of the acetabulum.” Effective February 7, 2021, after proposed rule and comment period, a final rule was issued updating rating schedule provisions pertaining to the musculoskeletal system, and explicitly stating that a minimum evaluation is assignable only for total joint replacement, not partial knee joint replacement.  In a September 20, 2022, decision, NOVA v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 48 F.4th 1307 (2022) concluded that prior to February 7, 2021, 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5055, as then written, did not exclude a partial knee replacement.  The court vacated the rule change that was effective from July 15, 2015, to February 6, 2021.
 
When deciding any claim involving evaluation of a partial knee joint replacement that was pending and not finally adjudicated on September 20, 2022, rate as follows:
For any rating period at issue prior to February 7, 2021, apply the text of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5055 in effect at that time, but without the note added effective July 16, 2015.
For the rating period on or after February 7, 2021, apply the text of the current 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5055 and the prefatory notes (as applicable).  However, always follow 38 CFR 3.951(a) on preservation of disability ratings when the rating schedule has been changed.
References:  For more information on
determining the effective date of a convalescence rating for a joint replacement, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.C.3.a
effective dates based on changes of regulation and judicial precedents, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6 and 7
DCs such as 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5051-5056, that provide for definite periods of schedular temporary total evaluation, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.D.1
due process issues pertinent to joint replacement or resurfacing including
change of DC for a protected disability evaluation or rating schedule changes, see
38 CFR 3.951
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.1.k, and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.4, and
additional reduction procedures that would apply prior to assignment of a post-surgical minimum evaluation lower than the running award rate, see
38 CFR 3.105(e)
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.A.1, and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.B.

V.iii.1.A.3.i.  Evaluating Residuals of Joint Resurfacing

Following the temporary 100-percent evaluation for joint resurfacing, reinstate the evaluation in place prior to the joint resurfacing procedures.  A review exam must be scheduled at the cessation of the temporary 100-percent evaluation period for joint resurfacing.  Residuals will be evaluated based on impairment of the joint as shown on the examination, and any
reduction in evaluation is subject to the provisions of 38 CFR 3.105(e), and
increased evaluation will be effective on the day following the temporary 100-percent evaluation period unless the facts clearly demonstrate that the increased level of impairment occurred on a later date, in such case the increase will be assigned based on the date entitlement arose.

V.iii.1.A.3.j.  Severe Painful Motion Following Joint Replacement

Severe painful motion and LOM, as utilized to evaluate residuals of joint replacements, are distinct concepts.
A finding of severe painful motion does not require that LOM be present.
LOM is, however, a factor that may be considered when evaluating painful motion.
Reference:  For more information on considering severe painful motion in a joint replacement evaluation, see Tedesco v. Wilkie, 31 Vet.App. 360 (2019).

V.iii.1.A.3.k.  Use of Active ROM Findings

Active ROM testing is required to measure functional loss as is utilized in DCs based on LOM.
Note:  Passive ROM is for consideration in evaluating painful motion, as described in 38 CFR 4.59 and M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.

  
4.  Examples of Evaluating Joint Conditions and Functional Loss
 

Introduction

This topic contains examples of evaluating joint conditions and functional loss, including
compensable limitation of 
two joint motions, and
one motion with pain in another motion
noncompensable limitation of two motions with pain
evaluating
a joint with
full ROM and functional loss due to pain, and
LOM and functional loss due to pain, and
joints with arthritis by x-ray evidence only with other joint(s) affected by a non-arthritic condition.

Change Date

September 15, 2021

V.iii.1.A.4.a.  Compensable Limitation of Two Joint Motions

Situation:  Evaluation of chronic knee strain with the following examination findings:
Flexion is limited to 45 degrees.
Extension is limited by 10 degrees. 
There is no painful motion.
There is no additional limitation of flexion or extension on additional repetitions or during flare-ups.
Result:  Assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260, and a separate 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.
Explanation:  Each disability (limitation of flexion and limitation of extension)warrants a separate evaluation and the evaluations are for distinct types of impairment. 

V.iii.1.A.4.b.  Compensable Limitation of One Motion With Pain in Another Motion

Situation:  Evaluation of knee tenosynovitis with the following examination findings:
Flexion is limited to 45 degrees with pain at that point and no additional loss with repetitive motion. 
Extension is full to the 0-degree position, but active extension is limited by pain to 5 degrees.
Result:  Assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5024-5260 and a noncompensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5024-5261. 
Explanation:
Flexion is compensable under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260, but extension remains limited to a noncompensable degree under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.
Under Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011), the painful extension could only be considered limited for the purpose of determining whether a 10-percent evaluation can be assigned for the joint under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, which is not applicable in this example because a compensable evaluation was already assigned for flexion under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260. 
38 CFR 4.59 does not support a separate compensable evaluation for painful extension.  The regulation states that the intention of the rating schedule is to recognize actually painful joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable evaluation for the joint, not for each painful movement.
If the fact pattern involved chondromalacia patella or a knee strain rather than tenosynovitis, the result would be the same.

V.iii.1.A.4.c.  Noncompensable Limitation of Two Motions With Pain

Situation:  Evaluation of knee degenerative arthritis shown on x-ray with the following examination findings:
Flexion is limited to 135 degrees with pain at that point.
Extension is full to the 0-degree position with pain at that point.
There is no additional loss of flexion or extension on repetitive motion.
Result:  Assign one 10-percent evaluation for the knee under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260-5003.
Explanation:
There is limitation of major joint motion to a noncompensable degree under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260 and 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261, x-ray evidence of arthritis, and satisfactory evidence of painful motion.  Painful motion is limited motion for the purpose of applying 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.  Therefore, a 10-percent evaluation is warranted for the joint. 
Alternatively, it would also be permissible to assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003-5260 with consideration given to painful motion as provided in 38 CFR 4.59.
Assigning two compensable evaluations, each for pain, would be pyramiding.
Neither 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, nor 38 CFR 4.59 permits separate 10-percent evaluations for painful flexion and extension; they provide for a 10-percent evaluation for a joint. 
If the fact pattern involved chondromalacia patella or a knee strain rather than degenerative arthritis, a 10-percent evaluation, not separate evaluations, would still be warranted.  However, the authority would be 38 CFR 4.59, and 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260 would be used rather than 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.

V.iii.1.A.4.d.  Evaluating a Joint With Full ROM and Functional Loss Due to Pain

Situation:  Evaluation of a knee condition with normal initial ROM and additional functional loss indicated on DeLuca and Mitchell assessments.
Examination reveals normal ROM for extension of the knee, but pain on motion is present. 
In applying the DeLuca repetitive use test, the examiner determines that after repetitive use, extension of the knee is additionally limited and the post-test ROM is to 10 degrees due to pain.
The examiner provides a Mitchell assessment that during flare-ups the extension of the knee would be additionally limited to 15 degrees due to pain.
Result:  Assign one 20-percent disability evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261for limited extension of the knee.
Explanation:  A 15-degree limitation of extension, expressed in the Mitchellopinion, is the most advantageous assessment of functional loss for extension of the knee in this scenario.  Therefore, the knee will be evaluated based on extension limited to 15 degrees, resulting in a 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.

V.iii.1.A.4.e.  Evaluating a Joint With LOM and Functional Loss Due to Pain

Situation:  Evaluation of a knee condition with limited initial ROM and additional functional loss indicated on DeLuca and Mitchell assessments.
Flexion of the knee is limited to 70 degrees with pain on motion during initial examination.
In applying the DeLuca repetitive use test, the examiner determines that after repetitive use flexion of the knee is additionally limited, and the post-test ROM is 50 degrees as a result of pain with repetitive use.
The examiner provides a Mitchell assessment that during flare-ups the estimated ROM for flexion of the knee would be 30 degrees due to pain.
Result:  Assign one 20-percent disability evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260for limited flexion of the knee.
Explanation:  Flexion of the knee would be assessed at 30 degrees, as the ROM estimated in the Mitchell assessment is the most advantageous representation of the Veteran’s limitation of flexion. 
Reference:  For more information on the Deluca and Mitchell holdings, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.c and e.

V.iii.1.A.4.f.Evaluating Joints With Arthritis by X-Ray Evidence Only With Other Joint(s) Affected by a Non-Arthritic Condition

Example: A Veteran is rated 10 percent for bilateral degenerative arthritis of the elbows confirmed by x-ray evidence, without limited or painful motion or incapacitating exacerbations.  The Veteran subsequently files a claim for SC for chondromalacia of the right knee and is awarded a 20-percent evaluation based on VA examination, which revealed limitation of flexion of the right knee to 30 degrees. 
Analysis:  A 10-percent evaluation for bilateral arthritis of the elbows and a separate 20-percent evaluation for right knee chondromalacia is justified.  In this case, the rating does not violate Note (1) under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, because the knee condition is not an arthritic condition. 
Reference:  For additional information on the principle in 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, Note 1, see 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.e
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.4.b, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.5.d.

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section B - Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Extremities and Spine
Article ID: 554400000014410
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Arms
2
Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Hands
3
Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Spine
4
Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Legs
5
Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Feet 
 

 
1.  Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Arms
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities of the arms, including
considering separate evaluations for disabilities of the shoulder and arm
example of separate evaluations for disabilities of the shoulder and arm
assigning separate evaluations for disabilities of the elbow, forearm, and wrist
example of separate evaluations for multiple disabilities of the elbow, forearm, and wrist, and
considering impairment of supination and pronation of the forearm.

Change Date

April 13, 2018

V.iii.1.B.1.a.  Considering Separate Evaluations for Disabilities of the Shoulder and Arm

Separate evaluations may be given for disabilities of the shoulder and arm under 38 CFR 4.71a diagnostic codes (DCs) 5201, 5202, or 5203 if the manifestations represent separate and distinct symptomatology that are neither duplicative nor overlapping.
Reference:  For more information concerning separate and distinct symptomatology, see
38 CFR 4.14, and
Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994)

V.iii.1.B.1.b.  Example of Separate Evaluations for Disabilities of the Shoulder and Arm

Situation:  A Veteran was involved in an automobile accident that resulted in multiple injuries to the upper extremities.  The Veteran sustained the following injuries 
a humeral fracture resulting in restriction of arm motion at shoulder level, and
a clavicular fracture resulting in malunion of the clavicle.
Result:
assign a 20-percent evaluation for the impairment of the humerus under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5202-5201, and
assign a separate 10-percent evaluation for malunion of the clavicle under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5203.
Notes:
The hyphenated evaluation DC is assigned under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5202-5201 because the humerus impairment affects range of motion (ROM).
The separate evaluation for the clavicle disability is warranted because this disability does not affect ROM. 
Exception:  Multiple evaluations cannot be assigned under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201 for limited flexion and abduction of the shoulder. 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating shoulder conditions, see Yonek v. Shinseki, 722 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

V.iii.1.B.1.c.  Assigning Separate Evaluations for Disabilities of the Elbow, Forearm, and Wrist

Impairments of the elbow, forearm, and wrist will be assigned separate disability evaluations.  The motions of these joints are all viewed as clinically separate and distinct.  Assign separate evaluations for impairment under the following DCs:
elbow 
flexion under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5206, or
extension under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5207
forearm supination and pronation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5213, and
wrist flexion or ankylosis under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5214 or 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5215.
Notes: 
38 CFR 4.59 may be applied separately to the elbow, the forearm, and the wrist to result in potentially three separate evaluations for painful motion when the evidence otherwise supports such a finding.  However, 38 CFR 4.59 may only be applied once to the elbow and may not be separately applied to both elbow flexion and elbow extension. 
When examination or other evidence denotes pain present in the joint or periarticular region but does not delineate the specific motions in which pain is present and there is a potential for a separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59 as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1, obtain a medical opinion to determine which motions are painful.  When the examiner cannot delineate which motions are associated with pain, resolve doubt in favor of the Veteran and consider painful motion to be present in the separate plane such as to allow assignment of the separate minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59.
Reference:  For more information on assigning separate evaluations for elbow motion, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1. A.3.c.

V.iii.1.B.1.d.  Example of Separate Evaluations for Disabilities of the Elbow, Forearm, and Wrist

Situation:  A Veteran sustained multiple injuries to the right upper extremity in a vehicle rollover accident.  The following impairments are due to the service-connected (SC) injuries:
elbow flexion limited to 90 degrees
elbow extension limited to 45 degrees
full ROM on supination and pronation with painful supination, and
full ROM of the wrist with pain on dorsiflexion.
Result:  Assign the following disability evaluations
20-percent for limited elbow flexion under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5206
10-percent for limited elbow extension under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5207
10-percent for painful forearm supination under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5213, and
10-percent for painful wrist motion under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5215.
Explanation:
Compensable limitation of motion (LOM) of elbow flexion and extension is present.  Separate evaluations are warranted for elbow flexion and extension.
Motion of the forearm is separate and distinct from elbow motion.  Therefore, a separate evaluation is warranted for painful supination.
Motion of the wrist is separate and distinct from forearm motion.  Therefore, a separate evaluation is warranted for painful motion of the wrist. 
Note:  If elbow flexion is limited to 100 degrees and elbow extension is limited to 45 degrees, assign a single 20-percent disability evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5208.
References:  For more information on
separate evaluations for motion of a single joint, see
VAOPGCPREC 9-2004, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.c, and
separate evaluations for the elbow, forearm, and wrist, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.1.c.

V.iii.1.B.1.e.  Considering Impairment of Supination and Pronation of the Forearm

When preparing ratings decisions involving impairment of supination and pronation of the forearm, consider the following facts:
Full pronation is the position of the hand flat on a table.
Full supination is the position of the hand palm up.
When examining limitation of pronation, the
arc is from full supination to full pronation, and
middle of the arc is the position of the hand, palm vertical to the table.
Assign the lowest, 20-percent evaluation when pronation cannot be accomplished through more than the first three-quarters of the arc from full supination.
Do not assign a compensable evaluation for both limitation of pronation and limitation of supination of the same extremity.
Reference:  For more information on considering painful motion when assigning multiple LOM evaluations for a joint, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.e.

  
2.  Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Hands

Introduction

This topic contains information on evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities of the hands, including 
identifying digits of the hand
evaluating 
amputations of multiple fingers, and
ankylosis of one or more fingers
compensable evaluations for the fingers, and
rating Dupuytren’s contracture of the hand. 

Change Date

February 8, 2021

V.iii.1.B.2.a.  Identifying Digits of the Hand

Follow the guidelines listed below to accurately specify the injured digits of the hand.
The digits of the hand are identified as
thumb
index
long
ring, or
little.
Do not use numerical designations for either the fingers or the joints of the fingers.
Each digit, except the thumb, includes three phalanges
the proximal phalanx (closest to the wrist)
the middle phalanx, and
the distal phalanx (closest to the tip of the finger).
The joint between the proximal and middle phalanges is called the proximal interphalangeal or PIP joint.
The joint between the middle and distal phalanges is called the distal interphalangeal or DIP joint. 
The thumb has only two phalanges, the proximal phalanx and the distal phalanx.  Therefore, each thumb has only a single joint, called the interphalangeal or IP joint.
The joints connecting the phalanges in the hands to the metacarpals are the metacarpophalangeal or MCP joints.
Designate either right or left for the digits of the hand.
Note:  If the location of the injury is unclear, obtain x-rays to clarify the exact point of injury.
References:  For 
more information on 
determining dominant handedness, see 38 CFR 4.69, and
the normal anatomical position (also called position of function) of the hand and fingers and normal range of motion of the fingers, see Note 1 preceding 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5216, and
an exhibit of the anatomy of the hand, see the illustration following 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5156.

V.iii.1.B.2.b.  Evaluating Amputations of Multiple Fingers

Consider and apply the following principles as applicable when evaluating amputations of multiple fingers:
Amputations other than at the PIP joints or through the proximal phalanges will be rated as ankylosis of the fingers. 
Amputations at distal joints, or through distal phalanges (other than negligible losses) will be rated as favorable ankylosis of the fingers. 
Amputation through middle phalanges will be rated as unfavorable ankylosis of the fingers.
If there is amputation or resection of metacarpal bones (where more than one-half the bone is lost) in multiple finger injuries, add (not combine) 10 percent to the specified evaluation for the finger amputations subject to the amputation rule (at the forearm level).
When an evaluation is assigned under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5126 to 5130there will also be entitlement to special monthly compensation. 
Loss of use of the hand exists when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation stump with a suitable prosthetic appliance.

V.iii.1.B.2.c.  Evaluating Ankylosis of One or More Fingers

When considering an evaluation for ankylosis of the index, long, ring or little finger, evaluate as:
favorable ankylosis if either the MCP or PIP joint is ankylosed, and there is a gap of two inches (5.1 cm.) or less between the fingertip(s) and the proximal transverse crease of the palm, with the finger(s) flexed to the extent possible
unfavorable ankylosis if
either the MCP or PIP joint is ankylosed, and there is a gap of more than two inches (5.1 cm.) between the fingertip(s) and the proximal transverse crease of the palm, with the finger(s) flexed to the extent possible, or
both the MCP and PIP joints of a digit are ankylosed (even if each joint is individually fixed in a favorable position), or
amputation without metacarpal resection at the PIP joint or proximal thereto (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5153 to 5156) if both the MCP and PIP joints of a digit are ankylosed, and either is in extension or full flexion, or there is rotation or angulation of a bone.
When considering an evaluation for ankylosis of the thumb, evaluate as:
favorable ankylosis if either the carpometacarpal or IP joint is ankylosed, and there is a gap of two inches (5.1 cm.) or less between the thumb pad and fingers with the thumb attempting to oppose the fingers
unfavorable ankylosis if
either the carpometacarpal or IP joint is ankylosed, and there is a gap of more than two inches (5.1 cm.) between the thumbpad and the fingers, with the thumb attempting to oppose the fingers, or
both the carpometacarpal and IP joints are ankylosed (even if each joint is individually fixed in a favorable position), or
amputation at the carpometacarpal joint or joints or through proximal phalange (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5152) if both the carpometacarpal and IP joints are ankylosed, and either is in extension or full flexion, or there is rotation or angulation of a bone.
Note:  Only joints ankylosed in normal anatomical position as defined in Note 1 preceding 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5216 are considered favorably ankylosed. 
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluation of ankylosis of the fingers, see the notes prior to 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5216. 

V.iii.1.B.2.d.  Compensable Evaluations for the Fingers 

When considering evaluations for the fingers based on LOM, a compensable evaluation can be assigned for any of the following:
LOM of the thumb as specified in 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5228.
LOM of the index or long finger as specified in 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5229.
X-ray evidence of arthritis or other condition rated under the criteria of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, affecting a group of minor joints of the fingers of one hand.  There must be
noncompensable LOM in more than one of the joints comprising the group of affected minor joints, and
findings such as swelling, muscle spasm or satisfactory evidence of painful motion in the affected minor joints of the joint group.
X-ray-only evidence of arthritis (where there is no LOM) under the criteria of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, affecting two or more groups of minor joints – namely the fingers of both hands or a group of minor joints in one hand in combination with another group of minor joints.
Painful motion of the thumb, index finger, or long finger as directed at M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.l.
Note:  The Federal Circuit held in Spicer v. Shinseki, 752 F.3d 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2014) that when evaluating arthritis of the hand, the minor joint group of IP joints of a hand is compensably disabled only when two or more joints in the group are affected by LOM.  Refer to M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.a and b for more information on the applicability of the Spicer holding.  
References:  For more information on
use of the terms major and minor when evaluating joints, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.a
assigning evaluations under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 when a compensable rating based on LOM cannot be assigned under another DC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.4.b, and
applying 38 CFR 4.59 to minor joints, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.l.

V.iii.1.B.2.e.  Rating Dupuytren’s Contracture of the Hand

The rating schedule does not specifically list Dupuytren’s contracture as a disease entity; therefore, assign an evaluation on the basis of limitation of finger movement.

3.  Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Spine
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities of the spine, including
evaluating manifestations of spine diseases and injuries
variations in terminology for intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS)
definition of incapacitating episode of IVDS
objective neurological impairment associated with spinal disabilities
examples addressing neurological impairments associated with spinal disabilities
disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) selections for radiculopathy
example of evaluating IVDS, and
evaluating ankylosing spondylitis.

Change Date

February 27, 2025

V.iii.1.B.3.a.  Evaluating Manifestations of Spine Diseases and Injuries

Evaluate diseases and injuries of the spine based on the criteria listed in the 38 CFR 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula).  Under these criteria, evaluate conditions based on chronic orthopedic manifestations (for example, painful muscle spasm or LOM) and any associated neurological manifestations (for example, footdrop, muscle atrophy, or sensory loss) by assigning separate evaluations for the orthopedic and neurological manifestations.
Evaluate intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5243, either based on the General Rating Formula or the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes (Incapacitating Episode Formula), whichever formula results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under 38 CFR 4.25.
Notes: 
Utilize 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5243 only when there is disc herniation with compression and/or irritation of the adjacent nerve root.  Otherwise, assign 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5242 for all other disc diagnoses.
Irritation of the adjacent nerve root is evidenced by back pain and sciatica (pain along the course of the sciatic nerve) in the case of lumbar disc diseases.  For cervical disc disease, neck and arm or hand pain will be shown.
If an evaluation is assigned based on incapacitating episodes, a separate evaluation may not be assigned for LOM, radiculopathy, or any other associated objective neurological abnormality as doing so would constitute pyramiding under 38 CFR 4.14.
Spinal fusion is a type of fixation of the spine.  Evaluation based on ankylosis of the spine due to fusion is only warranted when the fixation affects the entire thoracolumbar or cervical spine segment.  Fusion of only a portion of the cervical or thoracolumbar spine segment should be evaluated based on range or motion or IVDS, as warranted by the evidence.
There is no presumption of service connection (SC) for degenerative disc disease (DDD).  Desiccation of the disc or other degenerative changes without any radiographic evidence of arthritic changes is not indicative of arthritis and is not, consequently, subject to presumptive SC under 38 CFR 3.309(a).
References:  For more information on 
evaluating 
degenerative spinal disease, such as spondylosis, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.E.1.e, and
Cousin v. Wilkie, 905 F.3d 1316 (Fed.Cir. 2018), and
co-existing SC and NSC disabilities affecting separate spinal segments, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.c, and
Langdon v. McDonough, 1 F.4th 1008 (Fed. Cir. 2021), and
the historical application of 
38 CFR 4.40, and  38 CFR 4.45 to evaluations for IVDS, see VAOPGCPREC 36-1997, and
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5285, for demonstrable deformity of a vertebral body, see VAOPGCPREC 3-2006.

V.iii.1.B.3.b.  Variations in Terminology for IVDS  

Variations of diagnostic terminology exist for IVDS.  When used in the clinical setting, the following terminology is consistent with the general designation of IVDS:
slipped or herniated disc
ruptured disc
prolapsed disc
bulging or protruded disc
DDD
sciatica
discogenic pain syndrome
herniated nucleus pulposus, and
pinched nerve.

V.iii.1.B.3.c.  Definition:  Incapacitating Episode of IVDS

By definition, an incapacitating episode of IVDS requires bedrest prescribed by a physician. 
When evaluating IVDS based on incapacitating episodes, there must be evidence the associated symptoms required bedrest as prescribed by a physician.  The medical evidence of prescribed bedrest must be
of record in the claims folder, or
reviewed and described by an examiner completing an examination or disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ).
Note:  If the records do not adequately document prescribed bedrest, use the General Rating Formula to evaluate IVDS and advise the Veteran to submit medical evidence documenting the periods of incapacitating episodes requiring bedrest prescribed by a physician.

V.iii.1.B.3.d.  Objective Neurological Impairment Associated With Spinal Disabilities  

Objective neurological abnormalities associated with spinal disabilities 
are evaluated separately from the spinal disability (except, as noted in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.3.a, when IVDS is evaluated based on incapacitating episodes), and
represent a medical progression or worsening of the spinal disease. 
For that reason and because neurological complications of spinal disease are contemplated in the evaluation criteria for spinal conditions under 38 CFR 4.71a, a claim asserting new complications of spinal disease is considered a claim for increase rather than a claim for secondary SC.
When evaluating an expressly claimed spinal disability, decision makers must consider entitlement to compensation for any neurological complications as within scope of the claim in accordance with M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c.
Likewise, a primary spinal condition responsible for an expressly claimed neurological complication is considered within the scope of the expressly claimed issue, as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.c.
When assigning effective dates for neurological spinal complications, consider effective date provisions specifically for increases as specified in  M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.e. 
Notes:  
When an SC thoracolumbar disability is present and objective neurological abnormalities or radiculopathy are diagnosed but the medical evidence does not identify a specific nerve root, rate the lower extremity radiculopathy under the sciatic nerve, 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8520.
Additional examinations of other body systems may be required if there are neurological complications of the peripheral nerves, bladder, and/or impairment of sphincter control.  
Apply the previous provisions of historical 38 CFR 3.157(b) when determining the effective date for neurological abnormalities of the spine that are identified by requisite records prior to March 24, 2015. 
Example:  Veteran has been SC for DDD since 2012.  Upon review of a claim for increase received on June 2, 2015, it is noted in Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) medical records that the Veteran received treatment for bladder impairment secondary to DDD on July 7, 2014.  Because the VA medical records constitute a claim for increase under rules in effect prior to March 24, 2015, it is permissible to apply previous rules from 38 CFR 3.157 (b) in adjudicating the bladder impairment issue.
 
References:  For more information on 
assigning disability evaluations for
peripheral nerve disabilities, to include radiculopathy, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2, and
progressive spinal muscular atrophy, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.1.c
issues within the scope of a claim, see
38 CFR 3.155(d)(2), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2
assigning effective dates for neurological spinal complications, see
38 CFR 3.400(o)
38 CFR 3.155, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.1.g, and
procedural guidance on handling the effective dates and coding complications of an SC disability in Veterans Benefits Management System - Rating (VBMS-R), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.e.

V.iii.1.B.3.e.Examples Addressing Neurological Impairments Associated With Spinal Disabilities

Example 1:  A Veteran files a claim for an increased evaluation for the SC condition of spinal stenosis.  An intent to file (ITF) a claim was not received.  The DBQ shows decreased ROM of the spine that is unchanged from the prior evaluation and a diagnosis of radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities.  No other evidence indicates that radiculopathy was diagnosed prior to the date of this DBQ.  The rating activity should evaluate the spinal stenosis and grant SC for bilateral radiculopathy with an effective date assigned based on the receipt of the claim for the increased evaluation in the spinal stenosis.
Example 2:  A Veteran submits a claim for SC of right leg pain and numbness, more than one year following discharge.  An ITF is not associated with this claim.  Development of the claim confirms a diagnosis of radiculopathy that is due to an unclaimed back injury.  The back injury was sustained in service.  Sufficient evidence to establish SC for the back disability is of record.  Consider the unclaimed back disability within scope of the claimed radiculopathy and establish SC for both issues with an effective date assigned based on the date of the receipt of the claim for SC of radiculopathy.
Example 3:  The Veteran files a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, for an increased evaluation in an SC spinal disability.  In conjunction with that claim, the Veteran submits private medical records showing a diagnosis of radiculopathy, related to the SC spinal disability, within the last year.  An ITF is not associated with the claim.  The private medical evidence is sufficient to evaluate the radiculopathy but does not contain ROM findings for the lumbosacral spine.  The rating activity should grant SC for radiculopathy from the date of the diagnosis of radiculopathy (in accordance with 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2)) and defer the evaluation of the spinal disability for an increase evaluation examination.

V.iii.1.B.3.f.  DBQ Selections for Radiculopathy

Radiculopathy is a common type of neurological impairment associated with spinal disabilities.
Refer to the table below to determine which DBQ to request when the claimed disability is a thoracolumbar/cervical spine condition and/or lumbar/cervical radiculopathy.
 
If the claimed condition is a/an ...
Then, request the ...
thoracolumbar spine condition (initial SC or increased evaluation) with or without a claim for radiculopathy
Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire when otherwise necessary to decide the claim.
 
Important:
The DBQ contains a section for radiculopathy that must be completed by the examiner if there is an indication of radiculopathy.
If the examiner fails to address radiculopathy, the examination must be returned as insufficient.
cervical spine condition (initial SC or increased evaluation) with or without a claim for radiculopathy
Neck (Cervical Spine) Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire when otherwise necessary to decide the claim.
 
Important:
The DBQ contains a section for radiculopathy that must be completed by the examiner if there is an indication of radiculopathy.
If the examiner fails to address radiculopathy, the examination must be returned as insufficient.
increased evaluation of
lower extremity or lumbar radiculopathy, or
upper extremity or cervical radiculopathy
Peripheral Nerves Conditions (Not Including Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy) Disability Benefits Questionnaire.
upper extremity radiculopathy (initial SC) without a claim for cervical spine condition
Neck (Cervical Spine) Disability Benefits Questionnaire
Important:  If the examiner fails to address radiculopathy, the examination must be returned as insufficient.
lower extremity radiculopathy (initial SC) without a claim for thoracolumbar spine condition
Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire
 
Important:  If the examiner fails to address radiculopathy, the examination must be returned as insufficient.
 
Note:  Do not routinely request an examination for an issue(s) for which the evidence of record is sufficient to make a decision.  This includes DBQs completed by a private or VA provider that are deemed adequate for rating purposes.
References:  For more information on
determining when an examination is necessary to decide a claim, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A
using medical evidence in lieu of an examination, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B.1.a, and
sufficiency of examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.

V.iii.1.B.3.g.  Example of Evaluating IVDS

Situation:  A Veteran’s IVDS is being evaluated.
LOM warrants a 20-percent evaluation under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine
mild radiculopathy of the left lower extremity warrants a 10-percent evaluation as a neurological complication (evidence of irritation of the adjacent nerve root) under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8520, and
medical evidence shows incapacitating episodes requiring bedrest prescribed by a physician of four weeks duration over the past 12 months which would result in a 40-percent evaluation based on the incapacitating episode formula.
Result:  Assign a 40-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5243 based on incapacitating episodes. 
 
Explanation:
Evaluating IVDS using incapacitating episodes results in the highest evaluation.
Since incapacitating episodes are used to evaluate IVDS, the associated LOM and neurological signs and symptoms will not be assigned a separate evaluation.

V.iii.1.B.3.h.  Evaluating Ankylosing Spondylitis

Ankylosing spondylitis may be evaluated as an active disease process or based upon LOM of the spine. 
The table below describes appropriate action for evaluating ankylosing spondylitis.
If ankylosing spondylitis is ...
Then ...
an active process
evaluate under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5009(using the criteria in 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5002 for the acute phase).
inactive
evaluate based on chronic residuals affecting the spine under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 or DC 5240, and
separately evaluate other affected joints or body systems under the appropriate DC.


4.  Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Legs

Introduction

This topic contains information on evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities of the lower extremities (not including the feet), including 
evaluating noncompensable knee conditions
definition of instability and subluxation of the knee
evaluating instability of the knee
separate evaluations 
for knee instability and LOM, and
of meniscal disabilities
examples of evaluating meniscal disabilities
separate evaluations – genu recurvatum
conservative therapy for shin splints
evaluating pain associated with shin splints, and
ankle instability. 

Change Date

April 25, 2022

V.iii.1.B.4.a.  Evaluating Noncompensable Knee Conditions

Evaluate a noncompensable knee condition by analogy to 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257if
there is no associated arthritis
the schedular criteria for a noncompensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260 or DC 5261 are not met, and
the condition cannot be appropriately evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258, 5259, 5262, or 5263.
References:  For more information on
using analogous DCs, see 38 CFR 4.20, and 
when to assign a 0-percent evaluation, see 38 CFR 4.31.

V.iii.1.B.4.b.  Definitions:  Instability and Subluxation of the Knee

Instability, as referred to in 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257, includes 
patellar instability due to recurrent patellar subluxation or patellar dislocation, and/or
any other instability or laxity of the knee that involves other stabilizing structure of the knee such as the collateral or cruciate ligaments.
Subluxation refers to partial or incomplete dislocation of the knee joint (tibiofemoral dislocation/subluxation) or tendency for the patella to dislocate from its track (patellar dislocation/subluxation).  
 
Evaluations under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257 may be assigned based on the requirement for assistive device(s) and/or bracing.  The assistive device or bracing must be prescribed by a medical provider and there must be objective evidence of the prescription in the evidentiary record.  

V.iii.1.B.4.c.  Evaluating Instability of the Knee

Evaluations for instability of the knee are assigned based on whether the instability arises from
sprain or a ligament tear, or
patellar instability.
When there is persistent instability but the medical evidence and/or examination report does not identify the instability as related to either a ligament tear/sprain or a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex (such as instability due to osteoarthritis or osteoarthrosis), then evaluate it using the patellar instability criteria under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257.
Note:  The presence of persistent instability is sufficient to satisfy the requirement of recurrent symptoms for the 10-percent evaluation.

V.iii.1.B.4.d.  Separate Evaluations for Knee Instability and LOM

A separate evaluation for knee instability may be assigned in addition to any evaluation(s) assigned based on limitation of knee motion.  The Office of General Counsel has issued precedent opinions that an evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257, does not pyramid with evaluations based on LOM.  
  
References:  For more information on
pyramiding and separating individual findings in a rating decision, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b
separate evaluation of knee instability, see
VAOPGCPREC 23-1997, and
VAOPGCPREC 9-1998, and
evaluation of joint replacement or resurfacing, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.h-j.

V.iii.1.B.4.e.  Separate Evaluation of Meniscal Disabilities

Evaluation of a knee disability under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257, DC 5260, or 5261does not, as a matter of law, preclude separate evaluation of a meniscal disability of the same knee under 
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258 (dislocated semilunar cartilage), or
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5259 (symptomatic removal of semilunar cartilage).
A meniscal disability may be rated separately under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258/5259 apart from 
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257 for manifestations of the knee disability other than recurrent subluxation and instability, and/or
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260/5261 if a manifestation of the meniscal disability did not result in an elevation of the disability evaluation warranted  under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260/5261 via application of 38 CFR 4.40 and 38 CFR 4.45 pursuant to DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet.App. 202 (1995). 
Important: 
A repaired meniscal tear (s/p partial meniscectomy) is not directly synonymous with either 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258 or 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5259.  Therefore, it is most appropriate to rate the disability analogous to whichever code most closely approximates the current symptoms.
Entitlement to a separate evaluation for the meniscal disability depends on whether the manifestations are utilized to assign an evaluation under a different DC.  Evaluation of the same manifestation under multiple diagnoses is prohibited under 38 CFR 4.14.  Thus, when all the symptoms of the meniscal disability are used to support elevation of an evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260/5261 or assignment of an evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257, a separate evaluation cannot be assigned under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258/5259.
When considering applicability of 38 CFR 4.59 for meniscal disabilities,
when only a meniscal disability is present, utilize the procedures at M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.m, and
when multiple knee disabilities are present and the painful motion is attributable to a knee disability other than the meniscal condition, assign separate evaluations when otherwise warranted under 38 CFR 4.14.
The policy and procedures identified in this block reflect a change in policy resulting from the holding in Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet.App. 107 (2017), effective November 29, 2017.  Prior to the Lyles holding, separate evaluations for meniscal disabilities under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258 or DC 5259 and other knee evaluations under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257, 5260, or DC 5261 were prohibited.  This is not considered a liberalizing change.
References:  For more information on
evaluation of meniscal disabilities, see Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet.App. 107 (2017), and
examples of evaluation of meniscal disabilities, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.4.f.

V.iii.1.B.4.f.  Examples-- Evaluating Meniscal Disabilities

Example 1:  A Veteran’s left knee disability, which includes a meniscal condition, is evaluated as 30-percent disabling on the basis of limitation of extension under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.  The knee also manifests pain, swelling, popping, locking, and grinding due to the meniscus disability.  These symptoms, which are consistent with the manifestations identified under 38 CFR 4.40 and 38 CFR 4.45, were considered and did not result in a higher evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.  Therefore, they may be considered for assignment of a separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258/5259.
 
Example 2:  The evaluations and fact pattern for Example 1 are the same except that the VA examiner indicates that the pain, swelling, popping, locking, and grinding of the knee, which results from the meniscal disability, result in additional limitation of extension to 30 degrees during flare-ups or with repeated use over a period of time, which warrants an elevation of the rating to 40-percent under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.  A separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258/5259is not warranted for the symptoms of pain, swelling, popping, locking, and grinding since these symptoms were considered under 38 CFR 4.40 and 38 CFR 4.45 in accordance with the DeLuca holding to elevate the evaluation to 40-percent under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.  Assignment of a separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258/5259 would constitute pyramiding.
 
Example 3:  A Veteran’s left knee disability, which includes meniscal impairment, is evaluated as 30-percent disabling on the basis of limitation of extension under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.  Pain is present due to the meniscus disability.  A VA examiner indicated that pain during repetitive motion testing as well as functional loss due to pain during flare-ups additionally limit extension to 30 degrees, which results in elevation of the 30-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261 to 40-percent.  A separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258/5259 is not warranted for the symptoms of pain since it was considered under 38 CFR 4.40and 38 CFR 4.45 in accordance with the DeLuca holding to elevate the evaluation to 40-percent under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261.  Assignment of a separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5258/5259 would constitute pyramiding.
 
Example 4:  A Veteran’s right knee disability is evaluated as 20-percent disabling on the basis of limitation of extension.  This disability includes arthritis of the joint and a post-operative meniscal condition.  The knee also manifests pain, swelling, popping, locking, and grinding due to both arthritis and the meniscal condition.  A VA examiner found that repetitive motion testing additionally limited extension by five degrees, from 15 to 20 degrees, due to pain.  The consideration of pain on motion, which is a manifestation identified under 38 CFR 4.40 and 38 CFR 4.45, results in elevation of the evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261 to 30-percent.  Since the swelling, popping, locking, and grinding, which were at least in part due to the meniscal condition, were not considered in awarding a higher evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261 with application of 38 CFR 4.40 and 38 CFR 4.45, a separate evaluation may be awarded for the meniscus removal. 
 
Example 5:  Examination of the left knee disability reveals an unrepaired incomplete ligament tear that results in persistent instability.  The Veteran’s physician has prescribed a brace and a cane for ambulation.  Additionally, the Veteran has a history of meniscectomy with residual symptoms of stiffness, crepitus, and pain without effusion or locking.  ROM is full with no additional functional impairment following repeated ROM testing.  Since the stiffness, crepitus, and pain are separate symptoms and not used to support an evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257/5260/5261 and the persistent instability is not used to support an evaluation for the meniscal symptoms, a 20-percent evaluation is warranted under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257 with a separate 10-percent evaluation assigned under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5259.

V.iii.1.B.4.g.  Separate Evaluations – Genu Recurvatum

When evaluating genu recurvatum, which involves hyperextension of the knee beyond 0 degrees of extension, under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5263
do not also evaluate separately under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261, but
do evaluate separately under other evaluations if manifestations that are not overlapping, such as limitation of flexion under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260, are attributed to genu recurvatum, and
do not evaluate separately under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5257; however, if instability is manifested from genu recurvatum evaluate based on the criteria that will provide the highest evaluation.

V.iii.1.B.4.h.  Conservative Therapy for Shin Splints

Utilize 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5262 for evaluating impairment of the tibia and fibula including nonunion, malunion (evaluated under the corresponding knee or ankle codes based on associated impairment), or medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS).
 
Evaluations for MTSS may be based on the use of conservative treatment.  For this purpose, conservative treatment includes but is not limited to treatment of symptoms using the following:
rest
ice
elevation
medication
compression socks, and/or
massage.
Note:  MTSS is synonymous with shin splints.  Related assessments, such as compartment syndrome and/or stress fractures, may also appear in treatment records.  When compartment syndrome is the predominant diagnosis, however, a rating under 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5331 is warranted.

V.iii.1.B.4.i.  Evaluating Pain Associated With Shin Splints

MTSS, or shin splints, is a type of  joint or periarticular pathology which is a requirement for application of 38 CFR 4.59, for assignment of the minimum compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5262 when painful motion is shown and shin splints are otherwise noncompensable.  The following principles apply:
Shin splints with pain that is not associated with motion, such as pain on palpation, are noncompensable under 38 CFR 4.59.
The minimum compensable evaluation is warranted when painful motion due to shin splints occurs in nearby affected joints such as the ankle or knee or when shin pain or other similar pain occurs with motion.  However, when a separate knee or ankle disability exists and has been compensably evaluated, do not assign a compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59 for shin splints causing painful motion in an already-compensable SC knee or ankle joint.
Reference:  For more information on the applicability of 38 CFR 4.59 to ratings for shin splints, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.i, and
Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 346 (2016).  

V.iii.1.B.4.j. Ankle Instability

Do not assign separate evaluations for LOM and instability of the ankle.
 
The intent of the ankle DCs, including 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5271, is to address the overall ankle disability without limiting the focus to one specific type of ankle symptomatology.
 
Although 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5271 is titled, Ankle, limited motion of and utilizes objective ROM measurements to guide the decision maker as to the meaning of marked and moderate in evaluating symptoms, this DC may also be used to rate instability of the ankle with or without associated LOM.  
 
Note:  38 CFR 4.20 provides that when a condition is not listed in the rating schedule, an analogous rating is to be assigned.  Based on the facts found, the DC most appropriate to the findings and that results in the highest evaluation should be selected.
 
Reference:   For more information on analogous ratings, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.1.c, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.2.a and b.

 
5.  Evaluating Musculoskeletal Disabilities of the Feet

Introduction

This topic contains information on evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities of the feet, including 
selecting a DC for foot disabilities
identifying the digits of the foot
assigning separate evaluations for multiple foot disabilities
evaluating 
arthritis of the minor joints of the toes, and
plantar fasciitis
definition of metatarsalgia or Morton’s disease, and
evaluating 
metatarsalgia or Morton’s disease, and
metatarsalgia and
plantar fasciitis, and
pes planus. 

Change Date

February 8, 2021

V.iii.1.B.5.a.  Selecting a DC for Foot Disabilities

Foot injuries are rated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284.  The application of this DC is limited to disabilities resulting from actual injuries to the foot, as opposed to disabilities caused by, for example, degenerative conditions.  However, conditions that are not specifically listed under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284 may be rated by analogy under DC 5284.
 
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284 does not apply to the other conditions of the foot specifically listed under 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5276 through 5283 and 5269.  The listed conditions must be rated under the specified DCs and cannot be rated by analogy under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284.
In cases where a foot injury and either arthritis or another foot disability is involved
consider functional impairment, and
determine whether, depending on the nature of the disability and history of injury, it is more advantageous to evaluate the condition under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284 or another DC.
Reminder:  Consider the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.4.bconcerning applicability of the bilateral factor when a DC provides one evaluation for a bilateral condition.
References:  For more information on
limited applicability of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284 to foot injuries, see Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 484 (2016)
prohibition of evaluating specific foot disabilities otherwise listed in 38 CFR 4.71a analogously under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284, see Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 333 (2015), and
applying 38 CFR 4.59 to disabilities of minor joints, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.l.

V.iii.1.B.5.b.  Identifying the Digits of the Foot

Follow the guidelines listed below to accurately specify the injured digits of the foot.
Refer to the digits of the foot as
first or great toe
second
third
fourth, or
fifth.
Each digit, except the great toe, includes three phalanges
the proximal phalanx (closest to the ankle)
the middle phalanx, and
the distal phalanx (closest to the tip of the toe).
The joint between the proximal and middle phalanges is called the proximal  interphalangeal (PIP) joint.
The joint between the middle and distal phalanges is called the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint. 
The great toes each have only two phalanges, the proximal phalanx and the distal phalanx.  Therefore, each great toe has only a single joint, called the interphalangeal (IP) joint.
The joints connecting the phalanges in the feet to the metatarsals are the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints.
Designate either right or left for the digits of the foot.
Note:  If the location of the injury is unclear, obtain x-rays to clarify the exact point of injury.

V.iii.1.B.5.c.  Assigning Separate Evaluations for Multiple Foot Disabilities

38 CFR 4.14 requires that the evaluation of the same disability and/or the same manifestation under various diagnoses is to be avoided.
 
The compact anatomical structure of the foot as well as the inter-related physiological functioning may make it difficult to differentiate the etiology of certain disability symptoms.  When multiple SC foot disabilities are present but the etiology of the symptoms cannot be separated, assign a single disability evaluation for the predominant symptoms. 
 
If, however, the etiology of the symptoms can be delineated, separate disability evaluations may be assigned under multiple DCs for foot disabilities provided that the principles of 38 CFR 4.14 have not been violated.   
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating SC and non-service-connected (NSC) symptoms that cannot be separated, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.c.

V.iii.1.B.5.d.  Evaluating Arthritis of the Minor Joints of the Toes

For guidance on evaluating arthritis of a group of minor joints of the toes refer to the table below.
  
If arthritis ...
Then ...
is degenerative
affects a group of minor joints in one foot
is documented by x-ray evidence
results in LOM, and
is confirmed by satisfactory evidence of painful motion, pain on use or other findings such as swelling
assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.
is degenerative
affects minor joint groups in both feet, and
is documented by x-ray evidence, but
does not result in LOM
assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.
 
Exception:  Assign a 20-percent evaluation if there are occasional incapacitating exacerbations).
is post-traumatic
evaluate under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010-5284 with consideration given to 38 CFR 4.59 when warranted.
References:  For more information on 
assigning evaluations under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 when a compensable rating cannot be assigned under a DC for LOM of a joint, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.4.b, and
considering painful motion when evaluating functional loss for purpose of applying 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, pursuant to the holding in Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet.App. 32 (2011), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.e.

V.iii.1.B.5.e.Evaluating Plantar Fasciitis

Evaluate plantar fasciitis under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5269.
 
The most common symptom seen with plantar fasciitis is heel pain.  The following considerations apply when evaluating the heel pain.
When painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology is present and is a symptom of the plantar fasciitis, 38 CFR 4.59 is applicable.  However,  at least a 10-percent evaluation would most often be warranted under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5269 without consideration of 38 CFR 4.59.
When SC is established for pes planus and plantar fasciitis, evaluate the symptoms of both conditions together under the DC warranting the highest evaluation for the combined impairment.
Pes planus is characterized by pain on manipulation and use of the feet or other foot pain as included in the higher evaluation criteria.  The evaluation criteria for pes planus and plantar fasciitis are similar enough that providing separate evaluations will compensate the same facet of disability, foot pain, violating the prohibition against pyramiding in 38 CFR 4.14.
If, however, one or both conditions resulted from an injury to the foot, an evaluation for the combined conditions under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284 may be assigned in lieu of evaluation under either the pes planus or plantar fasciitis criteria when doing so is  more advantageous.
Reference:  For more information on rating by analogy, see 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.2, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.1.c.

V.iii.1.B.5.f.  Definition of Metatarsalgia or Morton’s Disease

Metatarsalgia means pain in the forefoot – under the metatarsal heads. 
Morton’s Disease or Morton’s Neuroma refers to a painful lesion of a plantar interdigital nerve.  

V.iii.1.B.5.g.Evaluating Metatarsalgia or Morton’s Disease

Anterior metatarsalgia of any type, to include cases due to Morton’s Disease, will be evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5279. 
The DC provides for an evaluation of 10 percent regardless of whether the condition is unilateral or bilateral.  

V.iii.1.B.5.h.  Evaluating Metatarsalgia and Plantar Fasciitis

Since metatarsalgia refers to pain in the forefoot while plantar fasciitis is associated with pain in the heel, the symptoms should generally not overlap and separate evaluations may be assigned unless assessment of the evidence reveals that separate evaluation would be in violation of the pyramiding rules at 38 CFR 4.14.

V.iii.1.B.5.i.  Evaluating Metatarsalgia and Pes Planus

Do not assign separate evaluations for pes planus and metatarsalgia.
Pes planus is accompanied by pain on manipulation and use of the feet or other foot pain, as included in the higher evaluation criteria.  The evaluation criteria are similar enough that providing separate evaluations will compensate the same facet of disability, foot pain, violating the prohibition against pyramiding in 38 CFR 4.14. 
Assign a single evaluation for pes planus with metatarsalgia using the predominant DC. 
Do not rate by analogy when there is an applicable DC. 
If, however, one or both conditions resulted from an injury to the foot,  an evaluation for the combined conditions under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5284may be assigned in lieu of evaluation under either the pes planus or metatarsalgia criteria when doing so is more advantageous. 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section C - Arthritis
Article ID: 554400000014413
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Multi-Joint Arthritis
2
Arthritis (Other Than Multi-Joint)
3
Distinguishing Between Degenerative and Post-Traumatic Arthritis
4
Limitation of Motion (LOM) in Arthritis Cases Evaluated Under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5003
5
Examples of Rating Decisions for LOM in Arthritis Cases
 

 
1.  Multi-Joint Arthritis
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about multi-joint arthritis, including
rating multi-joint arthritis
identification of active multi-joint arthritis, and
Marie-Strumpell disease.

Change Date

February 8, 2021

V.iii.1.C.1.a.  Rating Multi-Joint Arthritis

38 CFR 4.71a, diagnostic code (DC) 5002 applies to multi-joint arthritis.  Common examples of multi-joint arthritis include (but are not limited to)
rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
psoriatic arthritis, and
spondyloarthropathies.
Multi-joint arthritis is evaluated on the basis of
the active process, under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5002, or
chronic residuals, under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.
Note: 
The ratings for the active process will not be combined with ratings for residuals.
RA and some other types of infectious arthritis do not require x-ray evidence of bone changes to substantiate the diagnosis, since x-rays do not always show their existence.
Reference:  For more information on multi-joint arthritis, see Medical Electronic Performance Support System (MEPSS).

V.iii.1.C.1.b.  Identification of Active Multi-Joint Arthritis

When evaluating multi-joint arthritis as an active process, in the DIAGNOSIS field of the rating decision
provide the specific diagnosis for the multi-joint arthritis (for example, rheumatoid arthritis), and
state which joints are affected.

V.iii.1.C.1.c.  Marie-Strumpell Disease

Marie-Strumpell disease, also called rheumatoid spondylitis or ankylosing spondylitis, is not the same disease as RA.  RA and Marie-Strumpell disease have separate and distinct clinical manifestations and progress differently.
Reference:  For more information on evaluating ankylosing spondylitis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.f.

 
2.  Arthritis (Other Than Multi-Joint)
 

Introduction

This topic contains basic principles for rating arthritis, other than multi-joint, including
x-ray evidence of arthritis
establishing service connection (SC) for degenerative arthritis
post-traumatic arthritis
historical evaluation of post-traumatic arthritis, and
considering the effects of a change in diagnosis in arthritis cases.

Change Date

February 8, 2021

V.iii.1.C.2.a.  X-Ray Evidence of Arthritis

X-ray evidence of bone changes must be present to substantiate a diagnosis of arthritis.
 
Reference:  For more information on considering x-ray evidence when evaluating arthritis and non-specific joint pain, see
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.h.

V.iii.1.C.2.b.  Establishing SC for Degenerative Arthritis

Degenerative arthritis is evaluated using 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.  Degenerative arthritis can affect multiple joints, and its cause is likely multi-factorial. 
 
When 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 is assigned for an arthritic condition, every joint or group of joints affected by this disease is subject to service connection (SC) in the absence of an intervening cause.
If it has been medically determined that the Veteran has service-connected (SC) degenerative arthritis, and not post-traumatic arthritis, there is no need for a medical opinion to establish SC for each affected joint. 
Once degenerative arthritis has been clinically diagnosed and SC has been properly established for one affected joint, establish SC for and evaluate each joint as it becomes affected, with x-rays used to verify involvement of individual joints.
Note:  In evaluating arthritis of the spine, the principles for establishing SC for joints affected by the subsequent development of degenerative arthritis (as contemplated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003) are not dependent on the choice of DC. 
 
Example:  Veteran is SC for degenerative arthritis of the spine under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5242, and subsequently develops degenerative arthritis in the right elbow, with no intercurrent cause noted.  In this case, the principles of establishing SC for arthritic joints, as contemplated in 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, also apply even though the Veteran is rated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5242.  Thus, SC for arthritis of the right elbow may be established.
 
References:  For more information on
major and minor joints affected by arthritis, see
38 CFR 4.45(f), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.a
degenerative arthritis, see MEPSS
considering x-ray evidence when evaluating arthritis and non-specific joint pain, see
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B, and
distinguishing between degenerative and traumatic arthritis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.3.

V.iii.1.C.2.c.  Post-Traumatic Arthritis

When there is evidence showing a history of in-service trauma to a joint, utilize 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010 for rating purposes, which indicates the etiology of the condition is trauma-based.
 
Post-traumatic arthritis is
evaluated based on limitation of motion (LOM), dislocation, or other specified instability of the affected joint under the corresponding DC for the joint, and
not evaluated utilizing arthritis criteria, such as 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.
Important:  This principle applies even if the examiner or medical evidence
diagnoses arthritis but does not indicate within the diagnosis whether the disability is due to injury
does not provide a specific diagnosis of post-traumatic arthritis, and/or
diagnoses degenerative or osteoarthritis.

V.iii.1.C.2.d.  Historical Evaluation of Post-Traumatic Arthritis

Under the version of the rating schedule in effect prior to February 7, 2021, post-traumatic arthritis (previously called arthritis, due to trauma) was evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003. 
 
In accordance with 38 CFR 3.951, evaluations of post-traumatic arthritis assigned using the degenerative arthritis rating criteria cannot be reduced based solely on the readjustment of the rating schedule.  Reduction may be made only when medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved.
 
Reference:  For more information on the effect of rating schedule readjustment, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.i.

V.iii.1.C.2.e.  Considering the Effects of a Change in Diagnosis in Arthritis Cases

A change of diagnosis among the various types of arthritis, particularly if joint disease has been recognized as SC for several years, has no significant bearing on the question of SC.
 
Note:  In older individuals, the effects of more than one type of joint disease may coexist.
 
Reference:  For information on evaluating multi-joint arthritis, see 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5002.

 
3.  Distinguishing Between Degenerative and Post-Traumatic Arthritis 

Introduction

This topic contains information on distinguishing between degenerative and post-traumatic arthritis, including
determining the type of arthritis
handling unclear etiology of arthritis, and
example of
post-traumatic arthritis, and
handling unclear etiology for an arthritis diagnosis. 

Change Date

February 8, 2021

V.iii.1.C.3.a.  Determining the Type of Arthritis

Diagnoses of degenerative arthritis, osteoarthritis, and degenerative joint disease are generally used interchangeably in a clinical setting.  Clinicians may also use these diagnoses to refer to post-traumatic arthritis.  
In degenerative arthritis, designated for rating purposes under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, age is the most powerful risk factor.
For cases of arthritis due to trauma
the disability affects only the joint that received trauma, and 
although medical evidence may provide an etiological discussion of the disease, many clinicians do not routinely furnish a diagnosis of post-traumatic arthritis.
Notes:
History alone, and not x-ray findings or physical exam, may be the only distinguishing element for a medical diagnosis of arthritis due to trauma as opposed to other causes of arthritis.
Often a combination of age and repetitive use or age and major trauma can contribute to an arthritis disability picture. 

V.iii.1.C.3.b.  Handling Unclear Etiology of Arthritis 

When the etiology of the arthritis is unclear relative to whether the condition is degenerative or post-traumatic, obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology.  Ask the medical examiner whether the arthritis is due to, or the result of, an in-service injury. 
 
References:  For more information on
handling unclear etiology of arthritis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.3.d, and
requesting medical opinions, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.7.

V.iii.1.C.3.c.  Example of Post-Traumatic Arthritis

Situation:  Service treatment records (STRs) show the Veteran fractured his left ankle when he fell from a tank.  Treatment notes show ongoing complaints of ankle pain and LOM following the injury.  The Veteran was subsequently diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of the left ankle in service.  The x-ray report noted degenerative arthritis forming at the exact site of the fracture.  The STRs show no other complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of arthritis affecting other joints during the Veteran's remaining period of service.
 
A current VA exam shows a diagnosis of degenerative arthritis of the left ankle.  The Veteran provided a history of fracturing his left ankle when he fell from a tank.
 
Result:  Grant SC under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010 for degenerative arthritis of the left ankle.  Do not change the diagnosis to post-traumatic arthritis.  The condition is evaluated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010 establishing its origin from trauma.  The rating activity does not have the authority to change a medical diagnosis.  38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010 will be a hyphenated DC, most likely followed by 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5271, based on the residual symptoms such as limited range of motion (ROM) of the ankle. 
 
Important:  The medical evidence must clearly show the arthritis is a result of trauma, and no other causes, in order to evaluate under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010.

V.iii.1.C.3.d.  Example of Handling Unclear Etiology for an Arthritis Diagnosis

Situation:  The Veteran sprained his left ankle during service with no further treatment or complaints for the remaining period of service.  The Veteran submitted private medical evidence showing a diagnosis of degenerative arthritis and provided a history of a left ankle sprain during service.
 
Result:  The etiology of the Veteran’s arthritis is not clear.  Do not assume the arthritis is or is not related to the ankle sprain.  Since there is evidence of an in-service injury and a current diagnosis of arthritis involving the same joint, obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the arthritis.
 
Important:  If the resulting opinion links the in-service injury to the arthritis, evaluate the disability under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5010 (hyphenated with the DC for the predominant symptomatology). 

  
4.  LOM in Arthritis Cases Evaluated Under DC 5003
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on LOM due to arthritis evaluated under or analogously to 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, including
arthritis compensable under DCs based on ROM
joint conditions not compensable under DCs not based on ROM
arthritis previously rated as a single disability, and
using DCs 5013 through 5024.

Change Date

February 8, 2021

V.iii.1.C.4.a.  Arthritis Compensable Under DCs Based on ROM

For a joint or group of joints affected by degenerative arthritis (or a condition evaluated using the degenerative arthritis criteria), first attempt to assign an evaluation using the DC for ROM of the affected joint (38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5200-series).
When the requirements for compensable LOM of a joint are met under a DC other than 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, hyphenate that DC in the conclusion with a preceding “5003-.”
 
Example:  Degenerative arthritis of the knee manifested by limitation of knee extension justifying a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5261 would use the hyphenated DC “5003-5261.”
Reference:  For more information on evaluating LOM due to arthritis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.5.

V.iii.1.C.4.b.  Joint Conditions Not Compensable Under DCs Not Based on ROM

Whenever LOM due to degenerative arthritis is noncompensable under codes appropriate to a particular joint, assign 10 percent under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003for each major joint or group of minor joints affected by limited or painful motion as prescribed under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.
 
If there is no limited or painful motion, but there is x-ray evidence of degenerative arthritis, assign under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 either a 10- or a 20-percent evaluation for occasional incapacitating exacerbations, based on the involvement of two or more major joints or two or more groups of minor joints.
 
Important:  
Do not combine under 38 CFR 4.25 a 10- or 20-percent evaluation that is based solely on x-ray findings with evaluation that are based on limited or painful motion.  See example in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C.5.d. 
When subjective painful motion is shown, consider assignment of the minimal compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59, when otherwise appropriate.
References:  For more information on 
assigning a minimum evaluation based on painful motion as provided in 38 CFR 4.59 in cases rated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1.a, and
major and minor joints, see
38 CFR 4.45(f), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.3.

V.iii.1.C.4.c.  Arthritis Previously Rated as a Single Disability

In some cases, arthritis of multiple joints is rated as a single disability.
Use the information in the table below to process cases for which arthritis was previously evaluated as a single disability but the criteria for assignment of separate evaluations for affected joints was met at the time of the prior decision.
If …
Then …
the separate evaluation of the arthritic disability results in no change in the combined degree previously assigned, and
a rating decision is required
reevaluate using the current procedure with the same effective date as previously assigned.
reevaluating the arthritic joint separately results in an increased combined evaluation
apply 38 CFR 3.105(a) to retroactively increase the assigned evaluation.
reevaluating the arthritic joint separately results in a reduced combined evaluation
request an examination, and
if still appropriate, propose reduction under 38 CFR 3.105(a) and 38 CFR 3.105(e).
Exception:  Do not apply 38 CFR 3.105(a) if the assigned percentage is protected under 38 CFR 3.951.
Reference:  For more information on protected rating decisions, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.


V.iii.1.C.4.d.  Using DCs 5013 Through 5024

For 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5013 through 5024, evaluate the disability according to the criteria for limited or painful motion under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, degenerative arthritis.  
 
Notes:  
Do not analogously evaluate a disability unrelated to or not included in 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5013 through 5024, under these DCs. 
The provisions of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, regarding assignment of a compensable minimum evaluation of 10 percent for limited or painful motion are applicable to these DCs when the disability is not more favorably evaluated under the rating criteria for the corresponding joint. 
Example:  Right shoulder tendonitis is shown on examination with no pain, 0 to 175 degrees of flexion but otherwise full ROM, and evidence of swelling.  Assign a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5201-5024. 
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluations of 10 and 20 percent based on x-ray findings, see 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, Notes (1) and (2).

 
5.  Examples of Rating Decisions for LOM in Arthritis Cases
 

Introduction

This exhibit contains four examples of rating decisions for LOM in arthritis cases evaluated under or analogously to 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003 including an example of
degenerative arthritis with separately compensable joints affected
degenerative arthritis evaluated based on x-ray evidence only
noncompensable degenerative arthritis of a single joint, and
degenerative arthritis evaluated based on x-ray evidence only and another compensable evaluation.

Change Date

May 9, 2019

V.iii.1.C.5.a.  Example of Degenerative Arthritis With Separately Compensable Joints Affected

Situation:  The Veteran has residuals of degenerative arthritis with limitation of abduction of the right shoulder (major) to 90 degrees and limitation of flexion of the right knee to 45 degrees.
 
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (VE INC)
 
5003-5201
Degenerative arthritis, right shoulder (dominant)
20% from 12-14-03
 
 
 
5003-5260
Degenerative arthritis, right knee
10% from 12-14-03
 
 
 
COMB
30% from 12-14-03
Rationale:  The shoulder and knee separately meet compensable requirements under 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5201 and 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5260, respectively.

V.iii.1.C.5.b.  Example of Degenerative Arthritis Evaluated Based on X-Ray Evidence Only

Situation:  The Veteran has x-ray evidence of degenerative arthritis of both knees without
limited or painful motion of any of the affected joints, or
incapacitating episodes. 
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (PTE INC)
 
5003
Degenerative arthritis of the knees, x-ray evidence
10% from 12-30-01
 
Rationale:  There is no limited or painful motion in either joint, but there is x-ray evidence of arthritis in more than one joint to warrant a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.

V.iii.1.C.5.c.  Example of Noncompensable Degenerative Arthritis of a Single Joint

Situation:  The Veteran has x-ray evidence of degenerative arthritis of the right knee without limited or painful motion.
 
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (PTE INC)
 
5003
Degenerative arthritis, right knee, x-ray evidence only
0% from 12-30-01
 
Rationale:  There is no limited or painful motion in the right knee or x-ray evidence of arthritis in more than one joint to warrant a compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003.

V.iii.1.C.5.d.  Example of Degenerative Arthritis Evaluated Based on X-Ray Evidence Only and Another Compensable Evaluation 

Situation:  The Veteran has x-ray evidence of degenerative arthritis of both knees without limited or painful motion or incapacitating exacerbations.  The Veteran also has residuals of degenerative arthritis with limitation of abduction of the right shoulder (major) to 90 degrees.
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (VE INC)
 
5003-5201
Degenerative arthritis, right shoulder (dominant)
20% from 12-14-03
 
 
 
5257-5003
Degenerative arthritis, right knee
0% from 12-14-03
 
 
 
5257-5003
Degenerative arthritis, left knee
0% from 12-14-03
 
 
 
COMB
20% from 12-14-03
Rationale:  Since the shoulder condition meets compensable requirements under 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5201, each knee condition must be evaluated under separate DCs.  Based on Note (1) under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5003, ratings of arthritis based on x-ray findings only (without limited or painful motion or incapacitating exacerbations) cannot be combined with ratings of arthritis based on LOM.  
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section D - Osteomyelitis
Article ID: 554400000014418
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
Osteomyelitis
2
Examples of the Proper Rating Procedure for Osteomyelitis
 

 
1.  Osteomyelitis
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about osteomyelitis, including
historical evaluations for osteomyelitis
assigning historical evaluations for osteomyelitis
reasons to discontinue a historical evaluation for osteomyelitis
constitutional symptoms of osteomyelitis
criteria for a 100-percent osteomyelitis evaluation
active osteomyelitis associated with noncompensable amputation, and
application of the amputation rule to evaluations for osteomyelitis.

Change Date

November 8, 2021

V.iii.1.D.1.a.  Historical Evaluation for Osteomyelitis

Both the 10-percent evaluation and that part of the 20-percent evaluation that is based on “other evidence of active infection within the last five years” are
historical evaluations, and
based on recurrent episodes of osteomyelitis.
Note:  The 20-percent historical evaluation based on evidence of active infection within the past five years must be distinguished from the 20-percent evaluation authorized when there is a discharging sinus.

V.iii.1.D.1.b.  Assigning Historical Evaluations for Osteomyelitis

An initial episode of active osteomyelitis is not a basis for either of the historical evaluations.
Assign the historical evaluation as follows:
When the first recurrent episode of osteomyelitis is shown
assign a 20-percent historical evaluation, and
extend the evaluation for five years from the date of examination showing the osteomyelitis to be inactive.
Assign a closed evaluation at the expiration of the five-year extension.
Assign the 10-percent historical evaluation only if there have been two or more recurrences of active osteomyelitis following the initial infection.

V.iii.1.D.1.c.  Reasons to Discontinue a Historical  Evaluation for Osteomyelitis

Do not discontinue the historical evaluation, even if treatment includes saucerization, sequestrectomy, or guttering, because the osteomyelitis is not considered cured.
Exception:  If there has been removal or radical resection of the affected bone
consider osteomyelitis cured, and
discontinue the historical evaluation.

V.iii.1.D.1.d.  Constitutional Symptoms of Osteomyelitis

Constitutional symptoms are a prerequisite to the assignment of a 60-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, diagnostic code (DC) 5000.
Under the 100 percent criteria, as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.e, the presence of continuous constitutional symptoms is one facet for consideration in the assignment of the 100-percent evaluation. 
When the evaluation of osteomyelitis is based on constitutional symptoms, it is not subject to the amputation rule.
References:  For more information on the
amputation rule, see 38 CFR 4.68, and
historical policy interpretation of the requirement for constitutional systems for 100-percent evaluations, see the attachment Historical_M21-1V_iii_1_SecD_9-15-21.

V.iii.1.D.1.e.  Criteria for a 100-Percent Osteomyelitis Evaluation

The plain language of 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5000 does not require an active infection to establish a 100-percent evaluation for osteomyelitis.  Demonstration of chronic, acute, or subacute osteomyelitis with any of the following warrants entitlement to a 100-percent evaluation:
involvement
of the pelvis
of the vertebrae, or
extending into the major joints
with multiple locations, or
with a long history of intractability and debility, anemia, amyloid liver changes, or other continuous constitutional symptoms.
Note:  The guidance in this block represents a change in the Department of Veterans Affairs policy related to the evaluation of osteomyelitis at the 100-percent rate as effected by the holding of the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims in Huerta v. McDonough, 34 Vet.App. 76 (2021), decided on April 27, 2021.
 
Reference:  For more information on assigning effective dates based on judicial precedents, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.n.

V.iii.1.D.1.f.  Active Osteomyelitis Associated With Noncompensable Amputation

When the evaluation for amputation of an extremity or body part affected by osteomyelitis would be zero percent, assign a 10-percent evaluation if there is active osteomyelitis.

V.iii.1.D.1.g.  Application of the Amputation Rule to Evaluations for Osteomyelitis

Use the following table to determine how the amputation rule affects evaluations assigned for osteomyelitis.
If the osteomyelitis evaluation is ...
Then the amputation rule ...
10 percent based on active osteomyelitis of a body part where the amputation evaluation would normally be zero percent
does not apply.
10 percent based on active osteomyelitis of a body part where the amputation evaluation would normally be zero percent, or
30 percent or less under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5000, and
the 10-percent evaluation is combined with evaluations for
ankylosis
limited motion
nonunion or malunion
shortening, or
other musculoskeletal impairment
applies to the combined evaluation.
Note:  For osteomyelitis of the vertebrae or pelvis, extending into major joints, or affecting multiple locations, refer to the final row of this table. 
60 percent based on constitutional symptoms of osteomyelitis, per 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5000
does not apply since the 60-percent evaluation is based on constitutional symptoms.
100 percent, as described in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.e (including osteomyelitis of the pelvis or extending into the major joints)
does not apply.
Reference:  For more information on the amputation rule, see
38 CFR 4.68, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.F.1.e.

  
2.  Examples of the Proper Rating Procedure for Osteomyelitis
 

Introduction

This exhibit contains eight examples of the proper procedure for rating osteomyelitis, including an example of evaluating
osteomyelitis based on a history of a single active initial episode
an active initial episode of osteomyelitis
osteomyelitis
following review exam for initial active episode
with current discharging sinus, and
with a historical evaluation following a single recurrence with scheduled reduction due to inactivity
a recurrence of osteomyelitis
osteomyelitis following 
second recurrence, and
curative resection of affected bone, and
chronic osteomyelitis.

Change Date

November 8, 2021

V.iii.1.D.2.a.  Example of Evaluating Osteomyelitis Based on a History of a Single Active Initial Episode

Situation:  The Veteran was diagnosed with osteomyelitis in service with discharging sinus.  At separation from service the osteomyelitis was inactive with no involucrum or sequestrum.  There is no evidence of recurrence.
 
Result:  As there has been no recurrence of active osteomyelitis following the initial episode in service, the historical evaluation of 20 percent is not for application.  The requirements for a 20-percent evaluation based on activity are not met either.
Coded Conclusion:

1. SC (PTE INC)

5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia
0% from 12-2-93

Note:  For the scenarios discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.a-h, when the scenario involves dates, review the scenarios as if the actions are being taken at or near the time of the evidence presented in each scenario.  In other words, for the purposes of reviewing these scenarios only, do not apply protection of evaluation under 38 CFR 3.951(b).

V.iii.1.D.2.b.  Example of Evaluating an Active Initial Episode of Osteomyelitis

Situation:  Same facts as example shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.a, but the Veteran had a discharging sinus at the time of separation from service.
Result:  The Veteran meets the criteria for a 20-percent evaluation based on a discharging sinus.  Schedule a future examination to ascertain the date of inactivity.
Coded Conclusion:

1. SC (PTE INC)

5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia, active
20% from 12-2-93

Reference:  For more information on the assignment of a 20-percent evaluation when there is a discharging sinus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.a and b.

V.iii.1.D.2.c.  Example of Evaluating Osteomyelitis Following Review Exam for Initial Active Episode

Situation:  Same facts as example shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.b.  Subsequent review examination reveals the sinus tract was healed and there is no other evidence of active infection. 
Result:  Since the Veteran has not had a recurrent episode of osteomyelitis since service, a historical rating of 20 percent is not for application.  Take rating action under 38 CFR 3.105(e).
Coded Conclusion:

1. SC (PTE INC)

5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia, inactive
20% from 12-2-93

0% from 3-1-95

  

V.iii.1.D.2.d.  Example of Evaluating Osteomyelitis With Current Discharging Sinus

Situation:  Same facts as example shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.b.  The Veteran is hospitalized July 21, 1996, with active osteomyelitis of the right tibia shown with discharging sinus.  There is no involucrum, sequestrum, or constitutional symptom.  Upon release from the hospital the discharging sinus is still present. 
Result:  Assign the 20-percent evaluation based on evidence showing draining sinus from the proper effective date.  Schedule a future examination to ascertain date of inactivity.
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (PTE INC)
 
5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia, active
0% from 3-1-95
 
20% from 7-21-96
 
Reference:  For more information on the assignment of a 20-percent evaluation when there is a discharging sinus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.a and b.

V.iii.1.D.2.e.  Example of Evaluating Osteomyelitis With a Historical Evaluation Following a Single Recurrence With Scheduled Reduction Due to Inactivity

Situation:  Same facts as example shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.d.  A routine future examination was conducted on July 8, 1997, showing the osteomyelitis to be inactive.  There was no discharging sinus, no involucrum, sequestrum, or constitutional symptom.  The most recent episode of active osteomyelitis (July 21, 1996) constitutes the first “recurrent” episode of active osteomyelitis.
Result:  Continue the previously assigned 20-percent evaluation, which was awarded on the basis of discharging sinus as a historical evaluation for five years from the examination showing inactivity.  Assign a future ending date for the historical 20-percent evaluation 5 years from the date evidence shows inactivity.
Coded Conclusion:

1. SC (PTE INC)

5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia, inactive
20% from 7-21-96

0% from 7-8-02

References:  For more information on
assigning historical evaluations for osteomyelitis, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.a and b, and
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5000, Note 2, and
determining whether recurrent episodes of osteomyelitis have occurred, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.b.

V.iii.1.D.2.f.  Example of Evaluating a Recurrence of Osteomyelitis

Situation:  Same facts as example shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.e.  In October 1999, the Veteran was again found to have active osteomyelitis with a discharging sinus, without involucrum, sequestrum, or constitutional symptoms. 
Result:  Continue the 20-percent evaluation.  Reevaluation is necessary to remove the future reduction to zero percent and to schedule a future examination to establish the date of inactivity.
Coded Conclusion:

1. SC (PTE INC)

5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia, active
20% from 7-21-96



V.iii.1.D.2.g.  Example of Evaluating Osteomyelitis Following Second Recurrence

Situation:  Same facts as example shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.f.  A review examination was conducted on April 8, 2000.  The examination showed the discharging sinus was inactive, and there was no other evidence of active osteomyelitis.  The most recent episode of osteomyelitis (October 1999) constitutes the second "recurrent" episode of active osteomyelitis. 
Result:  The historical evaluations of 20 and 10 percent both apply.  Continue the 20-percent evaluation based on the historical criteria requiring activity within the past 5 years.  Assign a future ending date for the 20-percent evaluation 5 years from the date of last activity via assigning the lower 10-percent evaluation based on the historical criteria requiring inactive osteomyelitis following repeated episodes without active infection in the past 5 years. 
Coded Conclusion:

1. SC (PTE INC)

5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia, inactive
20% from 7-21-96

10% from 4-8-05

References:  For more information on
assigning historical evaluations for osteomyelitis, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.a and b, and
38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5000, Note 2, and
determining whether recurrent episodes of osteomyelitis have occurred, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.b.

V.iii.1.D.2.h.  Example of Evaluating Osteomyelitis Following Curative Resection of Affected Bone

Situation:  Same facts as example shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.2.g.  The Veteran was hospitalized June 10, 2002, with a recurrent episode of active osteomyelitis.  A radical resection of the right tibia was performed and at hospital discharge (June 21, 2002), the osteomyelitis was shown to be cured.
Result:  Assign a temporary total evaluation of 100 percent under 38 CFR 4.30with a 1-month period of convalescence.  Following application of 38 CFR 3.105(e), reduce the evaluation for osteomyelitis to zero percent as an evaluation for osteomyelitis will not be applied following cure by removal or radical resection of the affected bone.
Coded Conclusion:
1. SC (PTE INC)
5000
Osteomyelitis, right tibia, P.O.
20% from 7-21-96

100% from 6-10-02 (Par. 30)

20% from 8-1-02

0% from 10-1-02



V.iii.1.D.2.i.  Example of Evaluating Chronic Osteomyelitis

Situation:  During active service, a Veteran sustained an injury requiring a bone graft from the pelvis.  A year later, the Veteran was found to have osteomyelitis at the site of the bone graft.  Symptoms were treated with a course of antibiotics.  The Veteran’s symptoms recurred four years later.  Surgical intervention was utilized to treat soft tissue residuals of the osteomyelitis infection.  A chronic sinus tract was found during the surgery.  Two years later, the bone graft site again became infected and was treated with antibiotics, incision, and drainage.  An x-ray confirmed active osteomyelitis at that time.  A follow-up record one year later confirmed no further drainage or symptoms.  Further treatment and follow-up was recommended as physicians suspected that the disease process continued.  However, records thereafter reveal no further treatment. 
 
The Veteran submitted a claim for service connection twenty years after the treatment of the last active episode.  No current active infection or symptomatology is shown.
 
Result:  Assign a 100-percent evaluation based on the history of chronic osteomyelitis extending into the pelvis.

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section E - Muscle Injuries
Article ID: 554400000014422
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Principles for Evaluating Muscle Injuries
2
Applying 38 CFR 4.55, 4.56, and 4.73 for Muscle Injury Evaluations


 
1.  General Principles for Evaluating Muscle Injuries
 

Introduction

This topic contains general principles for evaluating muscle injuries, including
types of muscle injuries
standard muscle strength grading system for examinations
identification of muscle groups (MGs) in examination reports, and
fractures associated with gunshot wound (GSW) and shell fragment wounds (SFW).

Change Date

July 21, 2022

V.iii.1.E.1.a.  Types of Muscle Injuries

A missile that penetrates the body results in two problems
it destroys muscle tissue in its direct path by crushing it, then
the temporary cavitation forces stretch the tissues adjacent to the missile track and result in additional injury or destruction.
Muscles are much more severely disrupted if multiple penetrating projectiles strike in close proximity to each other.  Examples of this type of injury are
explosive device injuries
deforming or fragmenting rifle projectiles, or
any rifle projectile that strikes bone.
For additional information regarding types of injuries, the effects of explosions and projectiles, and symptoms and complications, refer to the table below.
Type of Injury
Initial Effects
Signs, Symptoms, and Complications
Gunshots
Entrance and exit wounds result. The amount of damage and relative size of entrance and exit wounds depends on many factors such as
caliber of bullet
distance from victim
organs, bone, blood vessels, and other structures hit.
Exit wounds are generally larger than entrance wounds, and
bullets are essentially sterile when they reach the body but carry particles into wound which could be sources of infection.
Fragments from explosive devices
Most result in decreased tissue penetration compared to denser rifle bullets.
Multiple fragments in a localized area result in tissue disruption affecting a wide area.
Tears and lacerations
Muscles that become isolated from nerve supply by lacerations will be non-functional.
 
Torn muscle fibers heal with very dense scar tissue, but the nerve stimulation will not cross this barrier.
Parts of muscle isolated from the nerve will most likely remain non-contractile resulting in a strength deficit proportional to amount of muscle tissue disrupted.
Treatment for small tears is symptomatic.
Large tears/lacerations may require reconstruction.
Through and through wound
Injuring instrument enters and exits one or multiple muscle groups.
Two wounds result
entrance wound, and
exit wound.
Reference:  For more information on the potential for multiple through and through wounds from a single injuring instrument, see Jones v. Principi, 18 Vet.App. 248 (2004).
References:  For more information on
muscle groups (MGs) and corresponding diagnostic codes (DCs), see 38 CFR 4.73
anatomical regions of the body, see 38 CFR 4.55(b), and
gunshot wounds (GSWs) with pleural cavity involvement, see 38 CFR 4.97, DC 6840-6845, Note (3).

V.iii.1.E.1.b.  Standard Muscle Strength Grading System for Examinations

Refer to the table below for information about how muscle strength is evaluated on an examination.
Numeric Grade
Corresponding Strength Assessment
Indications on Exam
(0)
absent
no contraction felt
(1)
trace
muscle can be felt to tighten but no movement is produced
(2)
poor
muscle movement is produced against gravity but cannot overcome resistance
(3)
fair
muscle movement is produced against gravity but cannot overcome resistance
(4)
good
muscle movement is produced against resistance, however, less than normal resistance
(5)
normal
muscle movement can overcome a normal resistance


V.iii.1.E.1.c.  Identification of MG in Examination Reports

The examination report must include information to adequately identify the MG affected by either
specifically noting which MG is affected, or
noting which muscles are involved so that the name of the muscles may be used to identify the MG affected.

V.iii.1.E.1.d.  Fractures Associated With GSW/SFW

All fractures associated with a GSW and/or shell fragment wound (SFW) will be considered open because all of them involve an opening to the outside.  Most GSW/SFW fractures are also comminuted due to the shattering nature of the injury.

2.   Applying 38 CFR 4.55, 4.56, and 4.73 for Muscle Injury Evaluations
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on applying 38 CFR 4.55, 4.56, and 4.73 for evaluations of muscle injuries, including
general criteria for muscle evaluations
determining whether 38 CFR 4.55 applies to muscle injuries
applying 38 CFR 4.55 to muscle injuries
evaluating 
joint manifestations and muscle damage acting on the same joint, and
damage to multiple muscles within the same MG
considering peripheral nerve involvement in muscle injuries
evaluating 
muscle injuries with peripheral nerve conditions of different etiology
scars associated with muscle injuries, and
painful motion associated with muscle injuries
applying the amputation rule to muscle injuries, and
evaluating muscle disabilities not involving shrapnel, GSWs, or other projectile-type injury.

Change Date

May 16, 2022

V.iii.1.E.2.a.  General Criteria for Muscle Evaluations

Evaluation of muscle disabilities is the result of a multi-factorial consideration.  However, there are hallmark traits that are suggestive of certain corresponding evaluations.  Refer to the following table for additional information regarding these hallmark traits and the suggested corresponding disability evaluation.
If the evidence shows a history of ...
Then consider evaluating the muscle injury as ...
open comminuted fracture with
muscle damage, or
tendon damage
severe.
Note:  This level of impairment is specified by regulation at 38 CFR 4.56(a).
through and through or deep penetrating wound by small high velocity missile or large low velocity missile with
debridement
prolonged infection, or
sloughing of soft parts, and
intermuscular scarring
at least moderately severe.
through and through injury with muscle damage
no less than moderate.
Note:  This level of impairment is specified by regulation at 38 CFR 4.56(b).
retained fragments in muscle tissue
at least moderate.
deep penetrating wound without
explosive effect of high velocity missile
residuals of debridement, or
prolonged infection
at least moderate.
 
Important:  No single factor is controlling for the assignment of a disability evaluation for a muscle injury. The entire evidence picture must be taken into consideration.
  
Reference:  For more information on assigning disability evaluations for muscle injuries, see
Tropf v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 317 (2006)
Robertson v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 70 (1993)
Jones v. Principi, 18 Vet.App. 248 (2004), and
38 CFR 4.55.

V.iii.1.E.2.b.  Determining Whether 38 CFR 4.55 Applies to Muscle Injuries

38 CFR 4.55 applies to certain combinations of muscle injuries and joint conditions.  Consider the provisions of 38 CFR 4.55 if
there are multiple MGs involved
the MG acts on a joint or joints, and/or
there is peripheral nerve damage to the same body part affected by the muscle.

V.iii.1.E.2.c.  Applying 38 CFR 4.55 to Muscle Injuries

If more than one MG is injured or affected or if the injured MG acts on a joint, conduct a preliminary review of the evidence to gather information needed to properly apply the provisions of 38 CFR 4.55.  The information needed will include whether the
affected MGs are in the same or different anatomic regions
MGs are acting on a single joint or multiple joints, and
joint or joints is/are ankylosed.
After the preliminary review is complete, use the evidence gathered and apply the following table to determine how 38 CFR 4.55 affects the evaluation of the muscle injury.
Step
Action
1
Does the MG(s) act on an ankylosed joint? 
If yes, go to Step 2.
If no, go to Step 4.
2
For MG(s) that act on an ankylosed joint, is the joint an ankylosed knee and is MG XIII disabled?  
If yes, grant separate evaluations for the ankylosed knee and the MG XIII injury.  For the MG XIII injury, assign the next lower level than that which would otherwise be assigned.  Then go to Step 3.
If no, then is the ankylosed joint the shoulder and are MGs I and II severely disabled? 
If yes, then assign a single evaluation for the muscle injury and the shoulder ankylosis under DC 5200.  The evaluation will be at the level of unfavorable ankylosis.
If no, then no evaluation will be assigned for the muscle injury.  The combined disability arising from the ankylosis and the muscle injury will be evaluated as ankylosis.
3
For the injury to MG XIII with an associated ankylosed knee, are there other MG injuries in the same anatomical region affecting the pelvic girdle and/or thigh? 
If no, then no additional change to the evaluation for the muscle injury is warranted.
If yes, do the affected MG injuries act on the ankylosed knee?
If yes, then no separate evaluation for the muscle injury to a MG other than MG XIII can be assigned, as indicated in Step 2.
If no, then for the MG XIII injury that acts on the knee and the injury to another MG of the pelvic girdle and thigh acting on a different joint, is the different joint ankylosed?
If yes, then no separate evaluation can be assigned for the other MG injury of the pelvic girdle and thigh, as indicated in Step 2.  No further action is warranted.
If no, then assign a single evaluation for the MG XIII injury and the injury to the other MG of the pelvic girdle and thigh anatomical region by determining the most severely injured MG and increasing by one level.
4
For muscle injury(ies) acting on unankylosed joint(s), is a single MG injury involved? 
If yes, then grant a single evaluation for the muscle injury.
If no, then are the MG injuries in the same anatomical region?
If yes, go to Step 5.
If no, go to Step 6.
5
Do the MGs in the same anatomical region act on a single joint? 
If yes, are the MGs involved MG I and II acting on a shoulder joint?
If yes, then
assign separate disability evaluations for the MGs, but
the combined evaluation cannot exceed the evaluation for unfavorable ankylosis of the shoulder.
If no, then for the muscles in the same anatomical region acting on a single joint,
assign separate disability evaluations for the MGs, but
the combined evaluation must be less than the evaluation that would be normally assigned for unfavorable anklyosis of the joint involved. 
If no, for the MGs in the same anatomical region acting on different joints, are the MG injuries compensable? 
If yes, then assign a single disability evaluation for the affected MGs by
determining the evaluation for the most severely injured MG, and
increasing by one level and using as the combined evaluation.
If no, then assign a noncompensable evaluation for the combined MG injuries.
6
For MG injuries in different anatomical areas, is a single unankylosed joint affected? 
If yes, are MG I and II affected and acting upon the shoulder?
If yes, then
assign separate disability evaluations for the muscle injuries, but
the combined evaluation cannot exceed the evaluation for unfavorable ankylosis of the shoulder.
If no, for the MG injuries in different anatomical areas affecting a single unankylosed joint (not including MG I and II acting on the shoulder)
assign separate disability evaluations for the muscle injuries, but
the combined evaluation must be lower than the evaluation that would be assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the affected joint. 
If no, then for MG injuries in different anatomical areas acting on different unankylosed joints, assign separate disability evaluations for each MG injury.
References:  For additional information on evaluating
joint manifestations and muscle damage acting on the same joint, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.d, and
peripheral nerve involvement in muscle injuries, see M21-1 Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.f.

V.iii.1.E.2.d.  Evaluating Joint Manifestations and Muscle Damage Acting on the Same Joint

A separate evaluation for joint manifestations and muscle damage acting on the same joint are prohibited if both conditions result in the same symptoms.
Although LOM is not directly discussed in 38 CFR 4.56, the DC provisions within 38 CFR 4.73 describing the functions of various MGs are describing motion. 
The muscles move the joint. 
If the joint manifestation is LOM, that manifestation is already compensated through the evaluation assigned by a muscle rating decision. 
Evaluating the same symptoms under multiple DCs is prohibited by 38 CFR 4.14.
Note:  Consider the degree of disability under the corresponding muscle DC and joint DC and assign the higher evaluation.
Exception:  Per 38 CFR 4.55(c)(1), if MG XIII is disabled and acts on an ankylosed knee, separate disability evaluations can be assigned for the muscle injury and the knee ankylosis.  However, the evaluation for the MG injury will be rated at the next lower level than that which would have otherwise been assigned. 
Reference:  For more information on applying 38 CFR 4.55 when evaluating muscle injuries and joint conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.b and c.  

V.iii.1.E.2.e.  Evaluating Damage to Multiple Muscles Within the Same MG

A separate evaluation cannot be assigned for each muscle within a single MG.  Muscle damage to any of the muscles within the group must be included in a single evaluation assigned for the MG. 

V.iii.1.E.2.f.  Considering Peripheral Nerve Involvement in Muscle Injuries

When there is nerve damage associated with the muscle injury, use the table below to determine appropriate actions to take to evaluate the nerve damage and the muscle injury.
If ...
Then ...
the nerve damage is in the same body part as the muscle injury, and
the muscle injury and the nerve damage affect the same functions of the affected body part
assign a single evaluation for the combined impairment by determining whether the nerve code or the muscle code will result in a higher evaluation. Assign the higher evaluation.
Note:  If the muscle and nerve evaluations are equal, evaluate with the DC with the highest maximum evaluation available.
the nerve damage is in the same body part as the muscle injury, and
the muscle injury and the nerve damage affect entirely different functions of the affected body part
assign separate evaluations for the nerve damage and the muscle injury.


V.iii.1.E.2.g.  Evaluating Muscle Injuries with Peripheral Nerve Conditions of Different Etiology

The provisions of 38 CFR 4.55 preclude the combining of a muscle injury rating with a peripheral nerve paralysis evaluation involving the same body part when the same functions are affected.  A muscle injury and a peripheral nerve paralysis of the same body part, originating from separate etiologies, may not be rated separately. 
The exception to this rule is only when entirely different functions are affected.
Etiology of the disability is irrelevant in rendering a determination regarding combining evaluations for muscle injuries and peripheral nerve paralysis. 
Example:  A Veteran is service-connected (SC) for GSW to the right leg MG XI at 10-percent.  SC diabetic peripheral neuropathy develops many years later.  The peripheral neuropathy affects the external popliteal nerve.  Since MG XI and the external popliteal nerve both control the same functions, dorsiflexion of the foot and extension of the toes, only a single disability evaluation can be assigned under either 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5311 or 38 CFR 4.73, DC 8521, whichever is more advantageous.

V.iii.1.E.2.h.  Evaluating Scars Associated With Muscle Injuries

Use the table below to determine appropriate action to take when evaluating scars associated with muscle injuries.
If ...
Then ...
there is scarring associated with the muscle injury
assign a separate evaluation for the scar, even if noncompensable.
there is painful or unstable scarring associated with the muscle injury
assign a separate compensable disability evaluation under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804.
there is scarring that results in functional loss under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7805 that is compensable
do not assign a separate evaluation if the body part affected and the functional impairment resulting from the scar are the same as the part and function affected by the muscle injury.
Reference:  For more information on assigning separate evaluations for the muscle injury and associated scarring, see
Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259 (1994)
Jones v. Principi, 18 Vet.App. 248 (2004), and
38 CFR 4.14.

V.iii.1.E.2.i.  Evaluating Painful Motion Associated With Muscle Injuries 

Fatigue-pain is a cardinal sign and symptom of muscle disability, as discussed in 38 CFR 4.56(c).  Painful motion associated with a muscle injury is consistent with fatigue-pain.  As noted in 38 CFR 4.56(d)(2)(iii), a record of consistent complaint of one or more of the cardinal signs and symptoms of muscle disability is consistent with at least moderate disability of the muscles. 

V.iii.1.E.2.j.  Applying the Amputation Rule to Muscle Injuries

The amputation rule applies to musculoskeletal conditions and any associated peripheral nerve injuries.  Therefore, when assigning separate evaluations for the muscle injury, peripheral nerve injury directly related to that muscle injury must be considered in applying the amputation rule.
 
References:  For more information on
the amputation rule, see 38 CFR 4.68, and
evaluating peripheral nerve disabilities associated with muscle injuries, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.f.

V.iii.1.E.2.k.  Evaluating Muscle Disabilities Not Involving Shrapnel, GSWs, or Other Projectile-Type Injury

Generally, apply 38 CFR 4.73 to muscle injuries such as those arising from shrapnel, GSWs, or other projectiles or similar foreign objects entering the muscle from outside the body since the criteria for the evaluation weigh heavily on the type of wound, treatment, and current manifestations of the wound. 
 
Generally, a disability such as that arising from injuries such as muscle strains, tears not resulting from injury by a foreign object entering the muscle, or muscle atrophy due to a SC joint or nerve injury should be evaluated under an appropriate DC based on associated functional impairment.
Exception:  Compartment syndrome is evaluated under 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5331using the muscle injury evaluation criteria.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section E - Muscle Injuries
Article ID: 554400000014422
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Principles for Evaluating Muscle Injuries
2
Applying 38 CFR 4.55, 4.56, and 4.73 for Muscle Injury Evaluations


 
1.  General Principles for Evaluating Muscle Injuries
 

Introduction

This topic contains general principles for evaluating muscle injuries, including
types of muscle injuries
standard muscle strength grading system for examinations
identification of muscle groups (MGs) in examination reports, and
fractures associated with gunshot wound (GSW) and shell fragment wounds (SFW).

Change Date

July 21, 2022

V.iii.1.E.1.a.  Types of Muscle Injuries

A missile that penetrates the body results in two problems
it destroys muscle tissue in its direct path by crushing it, then
the temporary cavitation forces stretch the tissues adjacent to the missile track and result in additional injury or destruction.
Muscles are much more severely disrupted if multiple penetrating projectiles strike in close proximity to each other.  Examples of this type of injury are
explosive device injuries
deforming or fragmenting rifle projectiles, or
any rifle projectile that strikes bone.
For additional information regarding types of injuries, the effects of explosions and projectiles, and symptoms and complications, refer to the table below.
Type of Injury
Initial Effects
Signs, Symptoms, and Complications
Gunshots
Entrance and exit wounds result. The amount of damage and relative size of entrance and exit wounds depends on many factors such as
caliber of bullet
distance from victim
organs, bone, blood vessels, and other structures hit.
Exit wounds are generally larger than entrance wounds, and
bullets are essentially sterile when they reach the body but carry particles into wound which could be sources of infection.
Fragments from explosive devices
Most result in decreased tissue penetration compared to denser rifle bullets.
Multiple fragments in a localized area result in tissue disruption affecting a wide area.
Tears and lacerations
Muscles that become isolated from nerve supply by lacerations will be non-functional.
 
Torn muscle fibers heal with very dense scar tissue, but the nerve stimulation will not cross this barrier.
Parts of muscle isolated from the nerve will most likely remain non-contractile resulting in a strength deficit proportional to amount of muscle tissue disrupted.
Treatment for small tears is symptomatic.
Large tears/lacerations may require reconstruction.
Through and through wound
Injuring instrument enters and exits one or multiple muscle groups.
Two wounds result
entrance wound, and
exit wound.
Reference:  For more information on the potential for multiple through and through wounds from a single injuring instrument, see Jones v. Principi, 18 Vet.App. 248 (2004).
References:  For more information on
muscle groups (MGs) and corresponding diagnostic codes (DCs), see 38 CFR 4.73
anatomical regions of the body, see 38 CFR 4.55(b), and
gunshot wounds (GSWs) with pleural cavity involvement, see 38 CFR 4.97, DC 6840-6845, Note (3).

V.iii.1.E.1.b.  Standard Muscle Strength Grading System for Examinations

Refer to the table below for information about how muscle strength is evaluated on an examination.
Numeric Grade
Corresponding Strength Assessment
Indications on Exam
(0)
absent
no contraction felt
(1)
trace
muscle can be felt to tighten but no movement is produced
(2)
poor
muscle movement is produced against gravity but cannot overcome resistance
(3)
fair
muscle movement is produced against gravity but cannot overcome resistance
(4)
good
muscle movement is produced against resistance, however, less than normal resistance
(5)
normal
muscle movement can overcome a normal resistance


V.iii.1.E.1.c.  Identification of MG in Examination Reports

The examination report must include information to adequately identify the MG affected by either
specifically noting which MG is affected, or
noting which muscles are involved so that the name of the muscles may be used to identify the MG affected.

V.iii.1.E.1.d.  Fractures Associated With GSW/SFW

All fractures associated with a GSW and/or shell fragment wound (SFW) will be considered open because all of them involve an opening to the outside.  Most GSW/SFW fractures are also comminuted due to the shattering nature of the injury.

2.   Applying 38 CFR 4.55, 4.56, and 4.73 for Muscle Injury Evaluations
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on applying 38 CFR 4.55, 4.56, and 4.73 for evaluations of muscle injuries, including
general criteria for muscle evaluations
determining whether 38 CFR 4.55 applies to muscle injuries
applying 38 CFR 4.55 to muscle injuries
evaluating 
joint manifestations and muscle damage acting on the same joint, and
damage to multiple muscles within the same MG
considering peripheral nerve involvement in muscle injuries
evaluating 
muscle injuries with peripheral nerve conditions of different etiology
scars associated with muscle injuries, and
painful motion associated with muscle injuries
applying the amputation rule to muscle injuries, and
evaluating muscle disabilities not involving shrapnel, GSWs, or other projectile-type injury.

Change Date

May 16, 2022

V.iii.1.E.2.a.  General Criteria for Muscle Evaluations

Evaluation of muscle disabilities is the result of a multi-factorial consideration.  However, there are hallmark traits that are suggestive of certain corresponding evaluations.  Refer to the following table for additional information regarding these hallmark traits and the suggested corresponding disability evaluation.
If the evidence shows a history of ...
Then consider evaluating the muscle injury as ...
open comminuted fracture with
muscle damage, or
tendon damage
severe.
Note:  This level of impairment is specified by regulation at 38 CFR 4.56(a).
through and through or deep penetrating wound by small high velocity missile or large low velocity missile with
debridement
prolonged infection, or
sloughing of soft parts, and
intermuscular scarring
at least moderately severe.
through and through injury with muscle damage
no less than moderate.
Note:  This level of impairment is specified by regulation at 38 CFR 4.56(b).
retained fragments in muscle tissue
at least moderate.
deep penetrating wound without
explosive effect of high velocity missile
residuals of debridement, or
prolonged infection
at least moderate.
 
Important:  No single factor is controlling for the assignment of a disability evaluation for a muscle injury. The entire evidence picture must be taken into consideration.
  
Reference:  For more information on assigning disability evaluations for muscle injuries, see
Tropf v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 317 (2006)
Robertson v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 70 (1993)
Jones v. Principi, 18 Vet.App. 248 (2004), and
38 CFR 4.55.

V.iii.1.E.2.b.  Determining Whether 38 CFR 4.55 Applies to Muscle Injuries

38 CFR 4.55 applies to certain combinations of muscle injuries and joint conditions.  Consider the provisions of 38 CFR 4.55 if
there are multiple MGs involved
the MG acts on a joint or joints, and/or
there is peripheral nerve damage to the same body part affected by the muscle.

V.iii.1.E.2.c.  Applying 38 CFR 4.55 to Muscle Injuries

If more than one MG is injured or affected or if the injured MG acts on a joint, conduct a preliminary review of the evidence to gather information needed to properly apply the provisions of 38 CFR 4.55.  The information needed will include whether the
affected MGs are in the same or different anatomic regions
MGs are acting on a single joint or multiple joints, and
joint or joints is/are ankylosed.
After the preliminary review is complete, use the evidence gathered and apply the following table to determine how 38 CFR 4.55 affects the evaluation of the muscle injury.
Step
Action
1
Does the MG(s) act on an ankylosed joint? 
If yes, go to Step 2.
If no, go to Step 4.
2
For MG(s) that act on an ankylosed joint, is the joint an ankylosed knee and is MG XIII disabled?  
If yes, grant separate evaluations for the ankylosed knee and the MG XIII injury.  For the MG XIII injury, assign the next lower level than that which would otherwise be assigned.  Then go to Step 3.
If no, then is the ankylosed joint the shoulder and are MGs I and II severely disabled? 
If yes, then assign a single evaluation for the muscle injury and the shoulder ankylosis under DC 5200.  The evaluation will be at the level of unfavorable ankylosis.
If no, then no evaluation will be assigned for the muscle injury.  The combined disability arising from the ankylosis and the muscle injury will be evaluated as ankylosis.
3
For the injury to MG XIII with an associated ankylosed knee, are there other MG injuries in the same anatomical region affecting the pelvic girdle and/or thigh? 
If no, then no additional change to the evaluation for the muscle injury is warranted.
If yes, do the affected MG injuries act on the ankylosed knee?
If yes, then no separate evaluation for the muscle injury to a MG other than MG XIII can be assigned, as indicated in Step 2.
If no, then for the MG XIII injury that acts on the knee and the injury to another MG of the pelvic girdle and thigh acting on a different joint, is the different joint ankylosed?
If yes, then no separate evaluation can be assigned for the other MG injury of the pelvic girdle and thigh, as indicated in Step 2.  No further action is warranted.
If no, then assign a single evaluation for the MG XIII injury and the injury to the other MG of the pelvic girdle and thigh anatomical region by determining the most severely injured MG and increasing by one level.
4
For muscle injury(ies) acting on unankylosed joint(s), is a single MG injury involved? 
If yes, then grant a single evaluation for the muscle injury.
If no, then are the MG injuries in the same anatomical region?
If yes, go to Step 5.
If no, go to Step 6.
5
Do the MGs in the same anatomical region act on a single joint? 
If yes, are the MGs involved MG I and II acting on a shoulder joint?
If yes, then
assign separate disability evaluations for the MGs, but
the combined evaluation cannot exceed the evaluation for unfavorable ankylosis of the shoulder.
If no, then for the muscles in the same anatomical region acting on a single joint,
assign separate disability evaluations for the MGs, but
the combined evaluation must be less than the evaluation that would be normally assigned for unfavorable anklyosis of the joint involved. 
If no, for the MGs in the same anatomical region acting on different joints, are the MG injuries compensable? 
If yes, then assign a single disability evaluation for the affected MGs by
determining the evaluation for the most severely injured MG, and
increasing by one level and using as the combined evaluation.
If no, then assign a noncompensable evaluation for the combined MG injuries.
6
For MG injuries in different anatomical areas, is a single unankylosed joint affected? 
If yes, are MG I and II affected and acting upon the shoulder?
If yes, then
assign separate disability evaluations for the muscle injuries, but
the combined evaluation cannot exceed the evaluation for unfavorable ankylosis of the shoulder.
If no, for the MG injuries in different anatomical areas affecting a single unankylosed joint (not including MG I and II acting on the shoulder)
assign separate disability evaluations for the muscle injuries, but
the combined evaluation must be lower than the evaluation that would be assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the affected joint. 
If no, then for MG injuries in different anatomical areas acting on different unankylosed joints, assign separate disability evaluations for each MG injury.
References:  For additional information on evaluating
joint manifestations and muscle damage acting on the same joint, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.d, and
peripheral nerve involvement in muscle injuries, see M21-1 Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.f.

V.iii.1.E.2.d.  Evaluating Joint Manifestations and Muscle Damage Acting on the Same Joint

A separate evaluation for joint manifestations and muscle damage acting on the same joint are prohibited if both conditions result in the same symptoms.
Although LOM is not directly discussed in 38 CFR 4.56, the DC provisions within 38 CFR 4.73 describing the functions of various MGs are describing motion. 
The muscles move the joint. 
If the joint manifestation is LOM, that manifestation is already compensated through the evaluation assigned by a muscle rating decision. 
Evaluating the same symptoms under multiple DCs is prohibited by 38 CFR 4.14.
Note:  Consider the degree of disability under the corresponding muscle DC and joint DC and assign the higher evaluation.
Exception:  Per 38 CFR 4.55(c)(1), if MG XIII is disabled and acts on an ankylosed knee, separate disability evaluations can be assigned for the muscle injury and the knee ankylosis.  However, the evaluation for the MG injury will be rated at the next lower level than that which would have otherwise been assigned. 
Reference:  For more information on applying 38 CFR 4.55 when evaluating muscle injuries and joint conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.b and c.  

V.iii.1.E.2.e.  Evaluating Damage to Multiple Muscles Within the Same MG

A separate evaluation cannot be assigned for each muscle within a single MG.  Muscle damage to any of the muscles within the group must be included in a single evaluation assigned for the MG. 

V.iii.1.E.2.f.  Considering Peripheral Nerve Involvement in Muscle Injuries

When there is nerve damage associated with the muscle injury, use the table below to determine appropriate actions to take to evaluate the nerve damage and the muscle injury.
If ...
Then ...
the nerve damage is in the same body part as the muscle injury, and
the muscle injury and the nerve damage affect the same functions of the affected body part
assign a single evaluation for the combined impairment by determining whether the nerve code or the muscle code will result in a higher evaluation. Assign the higher evaluation.
Note:  If the muscle and nerve evaluations are equal, evaluate with the DC with the highest maximum evaluation available.
the nerve damage is in the same body part as the muscle injury, and
the muscle injury and the nerve damage affect entirely different functions of the affected body part
assign separate evaluations for the nerve damage and the muscle injury.


V.iii.1.E.2.g.  Evaluating Muscle Injuries with Peripheral Nerve Conditions of Different Etiology

The provisions of 38 CFR 4.55 preclude the combining of a muscle injury rating with a peripheral nerve paralysis evaluation involving the same body part when the same functions are affected.  A muscle injury and a peripheral nerve paralysis of the same body part, originating from separate etiologies, may not be rated separately. 
The exception to this rule is only when entirely different functions are affected.
Etiology of the disability is irrelevant in rendering a determination regarding combining evaluations for muscle injuries and peripheral nerve paralysis. 
Example:  A Veteran is service-connected (SC) for GSW to the right leg MG XI at 10-percent.  SC diabetic peripheral neuropathy develops many years later.  The peripheral neuropathy affects the external popliteal nerve.  Since MG XI and the external popliteal nerve both control the same functions, dorsiflexion of the foot and extension of the toes, only a single disability evaluation can be assigned under either 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5311 or 38 CFR 4.73, DC 8521, whichever is more advantageous.

V.iii.1.E.2.h.  Evaluating Scars Associated With Muscle Injuries

Use the table below to determine appropriate action to take when evaluating scars associated with muscle injuries.
If ...
Then ...
there is scarring associated with the muscle injury
assign a separate evaluation for the scar, even if noncompensable.
there is painful or unstable scarring associated with the muscle injury
assign a separate compensable disability evaluation under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804.
there is scarring that results in functional loss under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7805 that is compensable
do not assign a separate evaluation if the body part affected and the functional impairment resulting from the scar are the same as the part and function affected by the muscle injury.
Reference:  For more information on assigning separate evaluations for the muscle injury and associated scarring, see
Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259 (1994)
Jones v. Principi, 18 Vet.App. 248 (2004), and
38 CFR 4.14.

V.iii.1.E.2.i.  Evaluating Painful Motion Associated With Muscle Injuries 

Fatigue-pain is a cardinal sign and symptom of muscle disability, as discussed in 38 CFR 4.56(c).  Painful motion associated with a muscle injury is consistent with fatigue-pain.  As noted in 38 CFR 4.56(d)(2)(iii), a record of consistent complaint of one or more of the cardinal signs and symptoms of muscle disability is consistent with at least moderate disability of the muscles. 

V.iii.1.E.2.j.  Applying the Amputation Rule to Muscle Injuries

The amputation rule applies to musculoskeletal conditions and any associated peripheral nerve injuries.  Therefore, when assigning separate evaluations for the muscle injury, peripheral nerve injury directly related to that muscle injury must be considered in applying the amputation rule.
 
References:  For more information on
the amputation rule, see 38 CFR 4.68, and
evaluating peripheral nerve disabilities associated with muscle injuries, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.f.

V.iii.1.E.2.k.  Evaluating Muscle Disabilities Not Involving Shrapnel, GSWs, or Other Projectile-Type Injury

Generally, apply 38 CFR 4.73 to muscle injuries such as those arising from shrapnel, GSWs, or other projectiles or similar foreign objects entering the muscle from outside the body since the criteria for the evaluation weigh heavily on the type of wound, treatment, and current manifestations of the wound. 
 
Generally, a disability such as that arising from injuries such as muscle strains, tears not resulting from injury by a foreign object entering the muscle, or muscle atrophy due to a SC joint or nerve injury should be evaluated under an appropriate DC based on associated functional impairment.
Exception:  Compartment syndrome is evaluated under 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5331using the muscle injury evaluation criteria.

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section F - Other Musculoskeletal Considerations
Article ID: 554400000014425
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the topic “Other Musculoskeletal Considerations.”

 
1.  Other Musculoskeletal Considerations
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains general guidance on evaluating musculoskeletal conditions, including
service connection (SC) for 
fractures, and
osteopenia
evaluating fibromyalgia
considering conflicting decisions regarding loss of use (LOU) of an extremity
applying the amputation rule
non-service-connected (NSC) amputation eliminating a distal service-connected (SC) disability
recognizing variations in musculoskeletal development and appearance
considering notable congenital or developmental defects, and
changes in the rating schedule.

Change Date
 
February 8, 2021

V.iii.1.F.1.a.  SC for Fractures
 
Decision makers must not automatically award service connection (SC) for fracture or fracture residuals based on a mere service treatment record (STR) reference to a fracture. 
Where SC of a fracture or fracture residuals is claimed, SC will be established when sufficient evidence, such as x-rays, a surgical report, casting, or a physical evaluation board report, documents the fracture. 
If SC of a fracture has not been claimed and objective evidence such as x-ray report documents an in-service fracture, invite a claim for SC for the fracture.
The following considerations apply when granting SC for a fracture:
SC will be established for a healed fracture even without current residual limited motion or functional impairment of a joint. 
Assign a diagnostic code (DC) consistent with the location of the fracture.  The fracture will be rated as noncompensable in the absence of any disabling manifestations. 
Reference:  For more information on unclaimed chronic disabilities found in STRs, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2.

V.iii.1.F.1.b.  SC for Osteopenia
 
Osteopenia is clinically defined as mild bone density loss that is often associated with the normal aging process.  Low bone density does not necessarily mean that an individual is losing bone, as this may be a normal variant.
 
Osteopenia is comparable to a laboratory finding which is not subject to service-connected (SC) compensation. 
 
Use the table below to determine the appropriate action to take when SC for osteopenia has been granted. 
 
If ...
Then ...
SC for osteopenia was granted by rating decision dated prior toDecember 19, 2013 (the date on which guidance was issued to clarify the proper procedures for considering SC for osteopenia)
do not sever SC, as it was properly established based on guidance available at the time the decision was made,
do not reduce the previously assigned evaluation unless the condition has improved, and
consider claims for increased evaluation and schedule examination as warranted based on the facts of the case. 
Note:  Provisions of 38 CFR 3.951 and 38 CFR 3.957 regarding protection of SC remain applicable.
SC for osteopenia was granted by rating decision dated on or after December 19, 2013
propose to sever SC based on a finding of clear and unmistakable error.
 
Note:  Osteoporosis, in contrast to osteopenia, is considered a disease entity characterized by severe bone loss that may interfere with mechanical support, structure, and function of the bone. SC for osteoporosis under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5013 is warranted when the requirements are otherwise met.

V.iii.1.F.1.c.  Evaluating Fibromyalgia
 
The criteria for evaluation of fibromyalgia under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5025 does not exclude assignment of separate evaluations when disabilities are diagnosed secondary to fibromyalgia.  This includes, but is not limited to, disability diagnoses for which symptoms are included in the evaluation criteria under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5025, such as
depression
anxiety
headache, and
irritable bowel syndrome.
Notes: 
If signs and symptoms are not sufficient to warrant a diagnosis of a separate condition, then they are evaluated with the musculoskeletal pain and tender points under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5025.
Widespread musculoskeletal pain characteristic of fibromyalgia does not warrant assignment of separate evaluations for affected joints when only fibromyalgia is diagnosed.
Co-existing, diagnosed musculoskeletal disabilities are evaluated separately.
The same signs and symptoms cannot be used to assign separate evaluations under different DCs, per 38 CFR 4.14.  
Widespread musculoskeletal pain associated with fibromyalgia is not necessarily synonymous with painful motion of joint or periarticular pathology.
Assignment of a compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5025 for fibromyalgia with widespread musculoskeletal pain does not prevent assignment of a compensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.59 for a separately diagnosed disability associated with painful motion of joint or periarticular pathology.
References:  For more information on 
evaluating chronic pain syndrome (somatic symptom disorder), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 13.1.i, and
evaluating co-existing fibromyalgia and mental disorders, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 13.1.h.

V.iii.1.F.1.d.  Considering Conflicting Decisions Regarding LOU of an Extremity
 
Forward the claims folder to Compensation Service, for an advisory opinion under M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.A.2 to resolve a conflict if
the Insurance Center determines loss of use (LOU) of two extremities prior to rating consideration involving the same issue, and
the determination conflicts with the proposed rating decision.
Note:  This issue will generally be brought to the attention of the rating activity as a result of the type of personal injury, correspondence, or some indication in the claims folder that the insurance activity is involved.

V.iii.1.F.1.e.  Applying the Amputation Rule
 
The combined evaluation for disabilities of an extremity shall not exceed the evaluation for the amputation at the elective level, were amputation to be performed.  The amputation rule is included in the musculoskeletal section of the rating schedule and, consequently, applies only to musculoskeletal disabilities and not to disabilities affecting other body systems.
Notes: 
Any peripheral nerve injury associated with the musculoskeletal injury will be considered when applying the amputation rule. 
Actual amputation with associated painful neuroma will be evaluated at the next-higher site of elective reamputation.  
The amputation rule does not apply to evaluations of peripheral nerve disabilities of the extremities including, but not limited to, diabetic neuropathy, radiculopathy/sciatica due to a spinal disorder, or peripheral nerve injuries of non-musculoskeletal etiology.
The amputation rule does not apply to bilateral evaluations assigned under single DCs found in 38 CFR 4.71a, such as those assigned for bilateral foot disabilities, except when being compared to a bilateral amputation of the same extremities.
References:  For more information on the
amputation rule, see 
38 CFR 4.68, and
Moyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet.App. 289 (1992)
application of the amputation rule to rating decisions for osteomyelitis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.D.1.g
application of the amputation rule to rating decisions for muscle injuries, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.j, and
Veterans Benefits Management System – Rating (VBMS-R) amputation rule instructions, see the VBMS Job Aid – Amputation Rule for VBMS-R.

V.iii.1.F.1.f.  NSC Amputation Eliminating a Distal SC Disability

For guidance on disability evaluation considerations when an non-service-connected (NSC) disability results in amputation that eliminates a distal SC disability, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.5.c.

V.iii.1.F.1.g.  Recognizing Variations in Musculoskeletal Development and Appearance

Individuals vary greatly in their musculoskeletal development and appearance.  Functional variations are often seen and can be attributed to
the type of individual, and
his/her inherited or congenital variations from the normal.

V.iii.1.F.1.h.  Considering Notable Congenital or Developmental Defects

Give careful attention to congenital or developmental defects such as
absence of parts
subluxation (partial dislocation of a joint)
deformity or exostosis (bony overgrowth) of parts, and/or
accessory or supernumerary (in excess of the normal number) parts.
Note congenital defects of the spine, especially
spondylolysis
spina bifida
unstable or exaggerated lumbosacral joints or angle, or
incomplete sacralization.
Notes: 
Do not automatically classify spondylolisthesis as a congenital condition, although it is commonly associated with a congenital defect.
Do not automatically classify joint subluxation as a developmental or congenital condition. 
Do not overlook congenital diastasis of the rectus abdominus, hernia of the diaphragm, and the various myotonias.
References:  For more information on 
congenital or developmental defects, see 
38 CFR 4.9, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.E, and
knee subluxation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.4.

V.iii.1.F.1.i.  Changes in the Rating Schedule

The rating criteria for musculoskeletal disabilities have undergone revisions.  The most recent large-scale revisions were effective on February 7, 2021.
 
Note:  These changes in rating criteria
are not considered liberalizing, and
should not be the basis for a reduction in disability rating unless medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved.
References:  For more information on the
history of changes to the rating schedule for musculoskeletal disabilities
through 2014, refer to the Board of Veterans Appeals Research Tools website for historical 38 CFR 4.71a (or other applicable references)
from 2015 and after, see the Electronic Code of Federal Regulations website (using the browse feature for the date needed), and
listed by DC, see 38 CFR Part 4, Appendix A, and
procedures for rating musculoskeletal disabilities prior to the February 7, 2021, update to the rating schedule, see the attachment Historical_M21-1III_iv_4_SecA_1-21-21.docx.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section A - Conditions of the Eyes
Article ID: 554400000014461
Updated May 28, 2025

 <--Previous Section  Next Section-->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
  
Topic
Topic Name
1
Basic Rating Principles for Eye Conditions
2
Congenital and Developmental Defects and Refractive Error of the Eyes
3
Other Eye Conditions
4
Examples of Rating Decisions for Diplopia


 
1.   Basic Rating Principles for Eye Conditions
 

Introduction

This topic contains basic rating principles for eye conditions, including
evaluating visual acuity
measuring field of vision
examination requirements for diplopia
evaluating diplopia with impairment of visual acuity or field
considering impairments of both visual acuity and visual field
incapacitating episodes of eye disease
citing disease or injury in the diagnosis
evaluating anatomical loss of one eye with inability to wear a prosthesis
considering visual acuity in a non-service-connected (NSC) eye when the other eye is service-connected (SC), and
changes in the eye rating schedule.

Change Date

June 7, 2019

V.iii.2.A.1.a.  Evaluating Visual Acuity

Evaluate central visual acuity on the basis of corrected distance vision with central fixation, even if a central scotoma is present.
 
Exception:  Evaluate the visual acuity of the poorer eye using either its uncorrected or corrected visual acuity, whichever results in better combined visual acuity, when
the lens required to correct distance vision in the poorer eye differs by more than three diopters from the lens required to correct distance vision in the better eye
the difference is not due to congenital or developmental refractive error, and
either the poorer eye or both eyes are service-connected (SC).
Reference:  For more information on evaluating eye disabilities based on visual acuity, see 38 CFR 4.76.

V.iii.2.A.1.b.  Measuring Field of Vision

The examining medical facility retains discretion in the exact method used to measure visual fields.  When visual field testing is required, the facility must use one of the following:
Goldmann Bowl kinetic perimetry
automatic perimetry (Humphrey Model 750, Octopus Model 101), or
later versions of the Humphrey or Octopus machines with simulated Goldmann kinetic perimetry.
Notes:
Follow the guidelines in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.a to determine when an examination report must contain visual field measurements.
Results from visual field testing may be reported in chart or table format.  Inclusion of the Goldmann chart or equivalent charting is not a requirement in any circumstance.  
References:  For more information on 
visual field standards, see 38 CFR 4.77, and
examinations for visual impairment and specifically visual field, see 38 CFR 4.77.

V.iii.2.A.1.c.  Examination Requirements for Diplopia

38 CFR 4.78 requires use of Goldmann Bowl kinetic perimeter testing or the Tangent Screen for examination of muscle function.  The examiner must document the results of muscle function testing by identifying the quadrant(s) and range(s) of degrees in which diplopia exists.  Documentation on a Goldmann Perimeter Chart is not required but is acceptable. 
A diagnosis of diplopia that reflects the disease or injury that is the cause of the diplopia must be of record.

V.iii.2.A.1.d.  Evaluating Diplopia With Impairment of Visual Acuity or Field

When the affected field with diplopia extends beyond more than one quadrant or range of degrees, evaluate diplopia based on the quadrant and degree range that provides the higher (or highest) evaluation.  When diplopia exists in two separate areas of the same eye, increase the equivalent visual acuity under 38 CFR 4.79, diagnostic code (DC) 6090 to the next poorer level of visual acuity, but not to exceed 5/200.
 
Follow the steps in the table below when assigning an evaluation to visual impairment when a claimant has both
diplopia, and
a ratable impairment of visual acuity or loss of visual field in either eye.
Step
Action
1
Assign a level of visual acuity for diplopia for only one eye under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6090.
2
Follow the instructions in the table below. 
If the visual acuity level assignable for diplopia is …
Then assign a level of corrected visual acuity for the poorer eye (or affected eye, if only one is SC) that is …
20/70 or 20/100
one step poorer than it would otherwise warrant, not to exceed 5/200.
20/200 or 15/200
two steps poorer than it would otherwise warrant, not to exceed 5/200.
5/200
three steps poorer than it would otherwise warrant, not to exceed 5/200.

3
Determine the evaluation for visual impairment under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6065 or 6066 by using the
adjusted visual acuity of the poorer eye (or affected eye, if only one is SC), and
corrected visual acuity for the better eye (or visual acuity of 20/40 for the other eye, if only one eye is SC).
 
Example:
The Veteran has an SC evaluation for diplopia.
Diplopia in both eyes is in the 31 to 40 degree range of upward vision and in the 31 to 40 degree range of lateral vision.
The diplopia in the upward vision is equivalent to visual acuity of 20/40, while the diplopia in the lateral vision is equivalent to visual acuity of 20/70.
Result:
Based on 38 CFR 4.78(b)(2) and (3), the overall equivalent visual acuity for diplopia is 20/100, which is one step poorer than the diplopia (in this case, the lateral) that provides the higher evaluation.
The overall evaluation for diplopia is, therefore, 10 percent, based on visual acuity of 20/100 for one eye and 20/40 for the other eye (diplopia is only taken into consideration for one eye).
Note:  Diplopia that is occasional or that is correctable with corrective lenses is evaluated at zero percent.
 
Reference:  For examples of rating decisions for diplopia, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.A.4.

V.iii.2.A.1.e.  Considering Impairments of Both Visual Acuity and Visual Field

When there are impairments of both visual acuity and visual field
determine for each eye the percentage evaluation for visual acuity and for visual field loss (expressed as a level of visual acuity under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6080), and
combine the evaluations under 38 CFR 4.25. 
The combined evaluation for visual impairment can then be combined with any other disabilities that are present.
 
Situation: 
Corrected visual acuity is 20/40 in the right eye and 20/70 in the left eye, warranting a 10-percent evaluation.
Visual field loss in right eye is remaining field 38 degrees (equivalent to visual acuity 20/70) and loss in left eye is remaining field 28 degrees (equivalent to visual acuity 20/100), warranting a 30-percent evaluation. 
Result:  Under 38 CFR 4.25, combine the 30-percent evaluation for visual field loss with the 10-percent evaluation for visual acuity, which results in a 40-percent combined evaluation for bilateral visual impairment.

V.iii.2.A.1.f.  Incapacitating Episodes of Eye Disease

An incapacitating episode, for the purpose of evaluating diseases of the eye, is a situation in which symptoms are severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes. 
 
Notes: 
A clinic visit for diagnostic, monitoring, or screening purposes is not sufficient to satisfy the criteria for a clinic visit for treatment purposes.
The definition of incapacitating episode was updated effective with the May 13, 2018, revision to 38 CFR 4.79.  This and other changes made in that update were not liberalizing changes. 
Reference:  For more information on incapacitating episodes of diseases of the eye, as well as examples of treatment sufficient to meet the criteria for incapacitating episodes, see 38 CFR 4.79, General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye, Notes 1 and 2.

V.iii.2.A.1.g.  Citing Disease or Injury in the Diagnosis

Cite the actual disease, injury, or other basic condition as the diagnosis, rather than a mere citation of impaired visual acuity, field of vision, or motor efficiency.
 
Note:  Actual pathology, other than refractive error, is required to support 
impairment of visual acuity.  Impaired field of vision and impaired motor field function must be supported by actual appropriate pathology.

V.iii.2.A.1.h.  Evaluating Anatomical Loss of One Eye With Inability to Wear a Prosthesis

When the evidence shows anatomical loss of one eye together with inability to wear a prosthesis, increase the evaluation for visual acuity under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6063 by 10 percent.
 
Notes:
The maximum evaluation for visual impairment of both eyes will not exceed 100 percent.
Assignment of the 10-percent increase under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6063precludes an evaluation under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800 based on gross distortion or asymmetry of an eye.  A separate evaluation may be assigned under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800 based on characteristics of disfigurement separate from gross distortion or asymmetry of an eye.
Reference:  For information on consideration of special monthly compensation for anatomical loss of an eye, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.j.

V.iii.2.A.1.i.  Considering Visual Acuity in an NSC Eye When the Other Eye Is SC

When visual impairment of only one eye is SC, either directly or by aggravation, consider the visual acuity of the non-service-connected (NSC) eye to be 20/40, subject to the provisions of 38 CFR 3.383(a).
 
Example 1 (Direct incurrence)
Situation:
Pre-service, a Veteran had visual acuity of 20/70 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, with a history of bilateral inactive chorioretinitis.
The Veteran developed a cataract in the left eye in service. 
Post-service, visual acuity was 20/70 in the right eye and 10/200 in the left eye.
At the time of the rating determination, the left eye cataract was pre-operative. 
Result:
The SC evaluation is 30 percent for the left eye cataract that was incurred in service, based on visual acuity of 10/200.
Since the right eye is NSC, it is considered to have normal vision (20/40) for the purposes of this calculation.
Example 2 (Aggravation)
Situation:
Pre-service, a Veteran had visual acuity of 20/50 in each eye due to scarring from an old injury.
The Veteran’s left eye was re-injured in combat. 
Post-service, visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye and 10/200 in the left eye. 
Result:
The SC evaluation is 20 percent for left eye aggravation (30 percent for 10/200 (current left eye) minus 10 percent for 20/50 (left eye on entrance)).
Since the Veteran’s right eye is NSC, it is considered to have normal vision (20/40) for the purposes of this calculation.
References:  For more information on
evaluating visual acuity, see 38 CFR 4.75 and 38 CFR 4.79, DCs 6063 through 6066, and
determining in-service aggravation of pre-service disability, see
38 CFR 3.306, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.E.

V.iii.2.A.1.j.  Changes in the Eye Rating Schedule 

The rating criteria for disabilities of the eyes have undergone historical changes.  Recent historical changes occurred on the following dates:
May 13, 2018, and
December 10, 2008.
Note:  These changes in the rating criteria
are not considered liberalizing, and
should not be the basis for a reduction in disability rating unless medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved. 
Reference:  For more information on the history of changes to the rating schedule for eye disabilities, refer the Board of Veterans Appeals Research Tools website for historical 38 CFR 4.79.

 2.  Congenital or Developmental Defects and Refractive Error of the Eyes

Introduction

This topic contains information on congenital or developmental defects and refractive errors of the eyes, including 
excluding congenital or developmental defects
definition of refractive errors
refractive errors
amblyopia, and
establishing SC for unusual developments. 

Change Date

 February 2, 2018

V.iii.2.A.2.a.  Excluding Congenital or Developmental Defects

Defects of form or structure of the eye that are of congenital or developmental origin may not be considered as disabilities or SC on the basis of incurrence or aggravation beyond natural progress during service.
 
The fact that a Veteran was supplied with glasses for correcting refractive error from any of the eye defects named above is not, in itself, considered indicative of aggravation by service that would warrant compensation.
 
Exception:  Malignant or pernicious myopia may be considered SC.

V.iii.2.A.2.b.  Definition:  Refractive Errors

Refractive errors are
due to anomalies in the shape and conformation of the eye structures, and
generally of congenital or developmental origin.
Examples:  Astigmatism, myopia, hyperopia, and presbyopia.

V.iii.2.A.2.c.  Refractive Errors

The effects of uncomplicated refractive errors must be excluded in considering impairment of vision from the standpoint of service connection (SC) and evaluation.
 
Exception:  Myopia may progress rapidly during the periods of service and lead to destructive changes, such as
changes in the choroid
retinal hemorrhage, and
retinal detachment.
Notes:
Children are usually hyperopic at birth and subsequently become less so, or they become emmetropic, or even myopic.
In adults, refractive errors are generally stationary or change slowly until the stage of presbyopia, also a developmental condition.
When dealing with refractive error only, if the best corrected vision on any examination by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is better than prior determinations, view these prior determinations to be erroneous or at least as not representing best correction.
Reference:  For more information on considering SC for refractive error of the eye, see 38 CFR  3.303(c).

V.iii.2.A.2.d.  Amblyopia

Ascertain the etiology of amblyopia in each individual case since a diagnosis may refer to either developmental or acquired causes of lost visual acuity.

V.iii.2.A.2.e.  Establishing SC for Unusual Developments 

Long-established policy permits establishment of SC for such unusual developments as choroidal degeneration, retinal hemorrhage or detachment, or rapid increase of myopia producing uncorrectable impairment of vision. 
 
Consider refractive error SC only under these unusual circumstances and when combined with uncorrectable residual visual impairment.
 
Note:  Irregular astigmatism may be due to corneal inflammation due to injury or operation.

 
3.  Other Eye Conditions
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on specific eye conditions, including
glaucoma
cataracts
dry eye syndrome
decision making principles - dry eye syndrome, and
retinitis pigmentosa.

Change Date

May 14, 2018

V.iii.2.A.3.a.  Glaucoma

Glaucoma is recognized as an organic disease of the nervous system and is subject to presumptive SC under 38 CFR 3.309(a). 
 
Consider glaucoma, manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from an entitling period of service, to be SC on a presumptive basis unless there is
affirmative evidence to the contrary, or
evidence that a recognized cause of the condition (also known as an intercurrent cause) was incurred between the date of separation from service and the onset of the disability.
Notes: 
Angle-closure glaucoma is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.
When evaluating glaucoma, assign a minimum evaluation of 10 percent if the evidence shows that continuous medication is required.
Reference:  For more information on presumptive SC for organic diseases of the nervous system, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.1.d, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.B.

V.iii.2.A.3.b.  Cataracts

38 CFR 4.79, DC 6027 requires that preoperative cataracts are to be evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.  If cataracts are postoperative in nature, evaluate under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye if a replacement lens is present (known as pseudophakia).  If there is no replacement lens, evaluate based on aphakia under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6029.

V.iii.2.A.3.c.  Dry Eye Syndrome 

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, more commonly known as dry eye syndrome, occurs when the surface of the eye becomes dry due to lack of quality tears. 
 
Dry eye syndrome may be due to a variety of causes to include
an underlying disease, such as diabetes mellitus or rheumatoid arthritis
medications, such as certain hypertensive and antidepressant medications, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, decongestants, or antihistamines, and
environmental exposures such as wind, high altitude, dry air, sun, or prolonged eye concentration. 
Treatment for dry eyes may include use of over-the-counter artificial tear drops, use of prescription medications, use of special contact lenses, use of plugs to block the tear ducts through which tears drain, or even surgical procedures.

V.iii.2.A.3.d.  Decision Making Principles - Dry Eye Syndrome

SC can be established for dry eye syndrome when it is directly incurred in, or aggravated by, service or when secondary to an SC condition.
 
Exception:  Elective procedures, such as laser eye surgery (e.g., LASIK), without unusual results or additional disability attributed to elective procedures are noteligible for SC.  Dry eye syndrome is a common result of laser eye surgery, and thus would not be eligible for SC if the etiology of the dry eye syndrome is due solely to an elective procedure.  
 
The disability picture present with dry eye syndrome varies and, therefore, an appropriate analogous DC must be selected dependent on the symptoms noted and etiology.  Appropriate DCs may include 38 CFR 4.79, DCs 6013, 6018, or 6025, depending upon the nature and symptomatology.  It may also be appropriate to evaluate as a symptom under the evaluation of the underlying condition.
 
Minimal symptomatology only requiring treatment by non-prescription eye drops would typically only warrant a zero percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.79, DCs 6013, 6018, or 6025 as it clearly does not approximate the criteria required for a compensable evaluation.
 
References:  For more information on the
principles of SC, see 
38 CFR 3.303
38 CFR 3.306
38 CFR 3.310, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 2.B, and
usual effects of medical and surgical treatment in service having the effect of ameliorating disease, see 38 CFR 3.306(b)(1).

V.iii.2.A.3.e.  Retinitis Pigmentosa

SC may be awarded for diseases of congenital, developmental, or familial origin that either first manifest themselves during service or that preexist service and progress at an abnormally high rate during service so as to demonstrate aggravation.
 
If no other cause is shown for retinitis pigmentosa, consider it to be hereditary, and determine SC based on whether or not there has been aggravation of this preexisting condition during service.
Reference:  For more information on considering SC for developmental defects or diseases, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.E.

  
4.   Examples of Rating Decisions for Diplopia
 

Introduction

This topic contains examples of rating decisions for diplopia, including
example 1
example 2, and
example 3.

Change Date

August 3, 2011

V.iii.2.A.4.a.  Example 1

Situation:  The Veteran filed an original claim for bilateral impairment of visual acuity on June 1, 2009.  VA examination reveals the best distant vision obtainable after correction is 20/200 (6/60) in the right eye and 20/70 (6/21) in the left eye.  Diplopia secondary to thyroid myopathy has been diagnosed and is within 24 degrees in the upward quadrant.  Diplopia within 24 degrees in the upward quadrant is ratable as 20/70 (6/21) under DC 6090.
 
Rationale:  Because the evaluation for diplopia is 20/70, evaluate visual acuity in the poorer eye (right) as 15/200 per 38 CFR 4.78, one step poorer than it would otherwise warrant.  
  
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (VE INC)
 
6066
Visual impairment secondary to thyroid myopathy, bilateral, with diplopia
40 percent from 06/01/2009
 


V.iii.2.A.4.b.  Example 2

Situation:  The same facts as in Example 1, except the diplopia exists within 24 degrees in the downward quadrant.  Diplopia within 24 degrees in the downward quadrant is ratable as 15/200 (4.5/60) under DC 6090. 
 
Rationale:  Because the evaluation for diplopia is 15/200, evaluate visual acuity in the poorer eye (right) as 10/200 per 38 CFR 4.78, two steps poorer than it would otherwise warrant.
  
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (VE INC)
 
6066
Visual impairment secondary to thyroid myopathy, bilateral, with diplopia
50 percent from 06/01/2009
 
  

V.iii.2.A.4.c.  Example 3

Situation:  The Veteran is SC for impairment of the visual field in the right eye secondary to trauma.  The average contraction of the visual field is to 50 degrees and is ratable equivalent to 20/50 (6/15) at 10 percent.  Diplopia has been diagnosed secondary to trauma and exists within 20 degrees in the central area.  Diplopia within 20 degrees in the central area is ratable as 5/200 (1.5/60). 
 
Rationale:  Since the evaluation for diplopia is 5/200, evaluate the visual field impairment in the SC eye (right) as 20/200 per 38 CFR 4.78, three steps poorer than it would otherwise warrant. 
 
Result:  Assign a 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6090-6066 for diplopia with impairment of the visual field, right eye.  Do not assign a separate 10-percent evaluation for contraction of the visual field.
  
Coded Conclusion:
 
1. SC (VE INC)
 
6090-6066
Diplopia secondary to trauma, with impairment of visual field, right eye
20 percent from 06/01/2009
 

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 2, Section B - Conditions of the Auditory System
Article ID: 554400000014464
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
  
Topic
Topic Name
1
Rating Principles for Conditions of the Auditory System
2
Hearing Loss
3
Tinnitus
4
Peripheral Vestibular and Other Ear Disorders


 
1.   Rating Principles for Conditions of the Auditory System
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about rating principles for conditions of the auditory system, including
service connection (SC) for hearing loss and tinnitus
considering the Duty Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) Noise Exposure Listing and combat duties
considering National Guard and Reserve duty for hearing loss and/or tinnitus claims, and
requesting audiometric examinations and medical opinions.

Change Date

April 9, 2019

V.iii.2.B.1.a.  SC for Hearing Loss and Tinnitus

Review each claim for direct service connection (SC) for hearing loss and/or tinnitus for
sufficient evidence of a current audiological disability, or lay evidence of difficulty hearing, and
evidence documenting
hearing loss and/or tinnitus in service, or
an in-service event, injury, disease, or symptoms potentially related to an audiological disability.
Important:  
A claim for hearing loss is acceptable lay evidence that the claimant is stating that he/she experiences difficulty hearing.
A claim for tinnitus is acceptable lay evidence that the claimant is stating that he/she experiences symptoms associated with tinnitus, such as ringing in the ears. 
Sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus are considered organic diseases of the nervous system and are subject to presumptive SC under 38 CFR 3.309(a).
References:  For more information on 
decreased hearing thresholds on audiometry testing in service as evidence of an in-service event, injury, or disease see Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 155 (1993), and
tinnitus as a presumptive disability under 38 CFR 3.309(a), see
Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 258 (2015), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.1.d.

V.iii.2.B.1.b.  Considering the Duty MOS Noise Exposure Listing and Combat Duties

The Duty Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) Noise Exposure Listing, which has been reviewed and endorsed by each branch of service, is available at http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/rating/docs/dutymosnoise.xls.
Based on the Veteran’s records, review each duty MOS, Air Force Specialty Code, rating, or duty assignment documented on the Duty MOS Noise Exposure Listing to determine the probability of exposure to hazardous noise.  
When the duty position is shown to have a high, moderate, or lowprobability of hazardous noise exposure, concede exposure to hazardous noise for the purposes of establishing an event in service.
Also review the Veteran’s records for evidence that the Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy in active service during a period of war, campaign, or expedition.  If the evidence establishes that the Veteran was engaged in combat, concede exposure to hazardous noise for the purposes of establishing an event in service.
Notes: 
The Duty MOS Noise Exposure Listing is not an exclusive means of establishing a Veteran’s in-service noise exposure.  Evaluate claims for SC for hearing loss in light of the circumstances of the Veteran’s service and all available evidence, including treatment records and examination results.
When hazardous noise exposure is conceded based on the Veteran engaging in combat, accept satisfactory lay or other evidence of service incurrence or aggravation of such injury or disease, if consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service, even if there is no official record of such incurrence or aggravation in such service.  Resolve every reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, unless there is clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
References:  For more information on
considering the circumstances of the Veteran’s service, see 
38 U.S.C. 1154(a) and (b), and
38 CFR 3.304(d)
considering combat service for purposes of conceding in-service noise exposure and determining service incurrence of a disability, see Reeves v. Shinseki 682 F.3d 988 (Fed.Cir. 2012), and
requesting audiometric examinations and opinions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.d. 

V.iii.2.B.1.c.Considering National Guard and Reserve Duty for Hearing Loss and/or Tinnitus Claims

Claims for SC of hearing loss and/or tinnitus due to service in the National Guard or Reserves should be considered under the same criteria as any claim for SC of hearing loss and/or tinnitus.  The condition must be causally related to service.
First, consider SC on the basis of a potential relationship to periods of active duty or active duty for training (ADT).
When SC for hearing loss and/or tinnitus may not be directly related to a period of active duty or extended ADT, entitlement to SC may still be established if there has been a decrease in auditory acuity due to military duties as a member of the National Guard or Reserves.
SC for hearing loss and/or tinnitus can be established for inactive duty for training (IADT) if the condition can be linked to an injury during IADT as shown by the nature of service, MOS, lay evidence, or other competent evidence.
Follow the procedures in the table below when developing for evidence of a decrease in auditory acuity due to National Guard or Reserve duty service and deciding whether an examination and/or medical opinion is warranted.
 
Step
Action
1
Obtain National Guard or Reserve medical records documenting the auditory baseline.
2
Consider the type of MOS and military duties performed during National Guard or Reserve service.  Follow the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.b.
 
Note:  For purposes of hearing loss or tinnitus during IADT, the MOS or other evidence establishing noise exposure serves as the injury during IADT required for SC eligibility, per M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.3.
3
Review the entire evidentiary record for noise exposure to ascertain both in-service and post-service exposure to hazardous noise.
 
Note:  Although the National Guard or Reserve service records should show auditory threshold shifts during National Guard or Reserve service, the auditory thresholds shown in service records do not need to meet the criteria in 38 CFR 3.385 to warrant an examination and/or medical opinion if all other requirements for ordering examinations and medical opinions in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A are satisfied.
References:  For more information on 
when evidence of decreased hearing on in-service audiometry testing, not constituting a disability as defined in 38 CFR 3.385, can support direct SC for hearing loss, see Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 155 (1993)
requesting records, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.C
updating Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) systems for active service based on multiple periods of ADT or IADT, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.B.3.d
duty status and eligibility of members of the Reserves, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.A.3
duty status and eligibility of personnel in the National Guard service, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 1.A.4
applying the presumption of soundness for ADT, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.e, and
examination requests, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.

V.iii.2.B.1.d.  Requesting Audiometric Examinations and Medical Opinions 

Where the question of SC is at issue, request an audiometric examination and/or medical opinion when necessary under 38 CFR 3.159(c)(4).
Competent evidence of a current diagnosis or symptoms could include records or lay evidence of difficulty hearing or tinnitus.  A claim for hearing loss is acceptable lay evidence that the claimant is stating that he/she experiences difficulty hearing.
Establishment of an event, injury, or disease in service is fact-specific.  Even if there is documentation of an in-service illness, injury, or event involving the ears or hearing, the Duty MOS Noise Exposure listing and evidence of combat service should still be considered.
When noise exposure is conceded based on the Duty MOS Noise Exposure Listing, include the level of probability conceded (high, moderate, low) in the information provided to the examiner in the body of the examination request.
If noise exposure is conceded based on engagement in combat with the enemy, include this detail in the information provided to the examiner in the body of the examination request. 
If an examination and/or opinion are otherwise necessary based on an event, injury, or disease, also include the probable level of exposure to hazardous noise associated with the Veteran’s documented duty position in the examination request remarks.
In most instances when noise exposure is conceded as a result of MOS, combat, or event in service this will also satisfy the indication of association between service and current disability for the purposes of finding an examination necessary. 
Notes:
An examination should be requested when a claim for hearing loss is received and there is evidence of an event, injury or disease in service.  Follow the procedures in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A.1.d with reference to the timing of the examination request.
A decision not to order an examination must be supported with adequate reasons and bases in the rating decision.
Request a medical opinion regarding the significance of prior audiological findings if the evidence of record is unclear on any point, such as when there is no evidence of calibrated audiometry testing in the record.  Older records frequently contain whispered voice tests which cannot be considered as reliable evidence that hearing loss did or did not occur.
References:  For more information on
when an exam is necessary under the duty to assist, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A.1.b
use of the duty MOS to determine if there was in-service hazardous noise exposure, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.b
considering a decrease in hearing thresholds on audiometry in service not meeting the definition of a hearing loss disability in 38 CFR 3.385 as evidence of an event, injury or disease, see Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 155 (1993)
medical opinions and the Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.7.h
qualification requirements of examiners for hearing loss and tinnitus examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.k
hearing loss and tinnitus examination report review, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.c, and
requesting medical opinions for tinnitus claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.3.b.

 
2.  Hearing Loss
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about hearing loss, including
sympathetic reading of hearing loss claims
regulatory definition of impaired hearing
changes in audiological testing methods
applying past versions of hearing loss criteria
handling changed criteria or testing methods
modified performance intensity function testing
evaluating 
unaided hearing acuity
exceptional patterns of hearing impairment, and
hearing loss when speech discrimination scores are not appropriate or cannot be obtained
using Veterans Benefits Management System – Rating (VBMS-R) decision tools in hearing impairment claims
audiometric values above 105 decibels
bone conduction results
hearing impairment due to Meniere’s Disease
compensation payable for paired organs under 38 USC 3.383
earlier effective date of increase for hearing loss, and
determining the need for reexamination.

Change Date

February 12, 2020

V.iii.2.B.2.a.  Sympathetic Reading of Hearing Loss Claims

Claims, particularly those from unrepresented claimants, must be read sympathetically.  In some cases, a claim that appears to raise only the issue of SC or an increased evaluation for hearing loss will, by reason of its wording, also require consideration of SC for tinnitus.    
 
In cases where the claim is phrased as a claim for SC or increased evaluation for “hearing loss” (or similar wording) and other lay or medical evidence raises the issue of tinnitus and establishes entitlement to SC, consider the issue of tinnitus as within scope of the claim for hearing loss. 
 
Where SC is established for tinnitus, use the date of the hearing-related claim for effective date purposes. 
Although the phrase “hearing loss” denotes diminished hearing acuity, a claimant without medical training might interpret extraneous sounds in the ear(s) or head (tinnitus) creating interference with normal hearing as “hearing loss.”  Because of this ambiguity, it is not clear that a claim phrased as being for “hearing loss” without further specific explanation, is intended to request adjudication only of hearing loss and not of tinnitus.  
References to “hearing impairment” or even just “hearing” are also ambiguous as to whether they concern reduced hearing acuity only or tinnitus as well.  
References:  For more information on
sympathetic reading doctrine and issues within the scope of a claim, see
38 CFR 3.155(d)(2)
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.c, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.a, and
sympathetic reading of tinnitus claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.3.a.

V.iii.2.B.2.b.Regulatory Definition of Impaired Hearing

Per 38 CFR 3.385, impaired hearing is considered a disability for VA purposes when
the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz (Hz) is 40 decibels or greater
the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hz are 26 decibels or greater, or
speech recognition scores using the Maryland Consonant-Vowel Nucleus-Consonant (CNC) Test are less than 94 percent.
Reference:  For more information on the impact of changes in audiological testing methods, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.c.

V.iii.2.B.2.c.  Changes in Audiological Testing Methods

Equipment and testing standards for hearing loss have undergone past changes.
Audiometry results from before 1969 may have been in American Standards Association (ASA) units. 
Current testing standards are set by the International Standards Organization (ISO) /American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
Test results should indicate the standard for the audiometry, but
if a military audiogram was performed prior to 1969 and does not specifically state it was conducted according to ISO/ANSI standards, assume the results are ASA, and
unless otherwise specified, assume audiograms performed from 1969 and later were conducted according to ISO or ANSI standards.
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) examinations for compensation purposes routinely converted ISO/ANSI results to ASA units until the end of 1975 because the regulatory standard for evaluating hearing loss was not changed to require ISO/ANSI units until September 9, 1975.
In order to facilitate data comparison for VA purposes under 38 CFR 3.385, ASA standards noted in service treatment records (STRs) dated prior to 1969 must be converted to ISO/ANSI standards. 
Important: 
Be careful in determining whether older audiometry results show a disability under 38 CFR 3.385.  Results today may indicate a different level of impairment than in the past because of changed equipment standards. 
If the audiometric results were reported in standards set forth by ASA, or the results date to a time when ASA units may have been used and you cannot determine what standards were used to obtain the readings, an audiologist opinion is necessary to interpret the results and convert any ASA test results to ISO/ANSI units for application of 38 CFR 3.385 in disability determinations. 
References:  For more information on
applying past versions of hearing loss tables, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.d, and
obtaining medical opinions, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.7.

V.iii.2.B.2.d.  Applying Past Versions of Hearing Loss Criteria

In some cases, it may be necessary to consider past legal criteria for evaluating hearing loss. Such cases may include
unresolved pending claims, and
claims where a past decision denying SC– or establishing an evaluation – for hearing loss must be revised due to clear and unmistakable error. 
This document contains all versions of hearing loss evaluation tables from Extension 8-B of the 1945 Schedule for Rating Disabilities to the amendment of 38 CFR 4.85(b), effective June 10, 1999.   
 
References:  For more information on
applying the law when criteria changes during a pending claim, see VAOPGRPREC 3-2000, and
standards for old audiometry, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.c. 

V.iii.2.B.2.e.  Handling Changed Criteria or Testing Methods

If there is a change in evaluation criteria (including a required change in testing methods) and applying the current facts to the changed criteria would support a lower evaluation but there has not been an improvement in the degree of hearing loss (or tinnitus), the existing evaluation may not be reduced. 
 
Reference:  For more information on preservation of disability ratings, see 38 CFR 3.951(a).

V.iii.2.B.2.f.  Modified Performance Intensity Function Testing

Per 38 CFR 4.85, Maryland CNC testing is required to evaluate speech discrimination for VA compensation purposes.  As a part of the Maryland CNC testing, when results are 92 percent or less following the preliminary administration of the test, a performance intensity function test must be performed. 
 
Performance intensity function testing involves conducting three repetitions of speech recognition testing. 
When an examination is performed by a VA or contract examiner, assume that the performance intensity function testing has been completed unless there is a clear indication to the contrary.
When private medical evidence is reviewed for rating purposes, if speech recognition scores are 92 percent or less, ensure that performance intensity function testing was conducted.  Indicators that performance intensity function testing was conducted include (but are not limited to)
findings of three repetitions of speech recognition testing, wherein the maximum score using a full Maryland CNC word list must be used, or
a treating provider’s notation that performance intensity function testing was performed along with a report of the maximum speech recognition score based on a full Maryland CNC word list.

V.iii.2.B.2.g.  Evaluating Unaided Hearing Acuity

Examinations for hearing impairment are to be conducted without the use of hearing aids, as directed in 38 CFR 4.85(a).
 
When a Veteran’s hearing ability is aided by the use of a cochlear implant, the external processor for the cochlear implant must be removed prior to the examination to allow for testing of unaided hearing acuity.
 
Note:  Cochlear implants, while not able to restore normal hearing or cure hearing loss, do allow severely hearing-impaired Veterans to perceive the sensation of sound. 
Cochlear implants consist of an internal implant and a removable external processor.  Removal of the external processor will allow for testing of unaided hearing acuity. 
Examinations conducted with the use of the functioning cochlear implant with the external processor in place should be returned with instructions that the examination be repeated with removal of the Veteran’s external processor. 

V.iii.2.B.2.h.  Evaluating Exceptional Patterns of Hearing Impairment

Consideration should be made as to whether current audiometric readings demonstrate an exceptional pattern of hearing impairment.  An exceptional pattern of hearing impairment is shown if
the puretone threshold at each of the four specified frequencies (1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hz) is 55 decibels or more, or
the puretone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hz and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hz.
When an exceptional pattern of hearing impairment is shown, the rating activity will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment using either Table VI or VIA, in 38 CFR 4.85 (h), whichever results in the higher numeral. 
 
Important:  When the puretone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hz and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hz, the Roman numeral obtained by using the appropriate table will be elevated to the next higher Roman numeral.
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating hearing loss based on exceptional patterns of hearing impairment, see 38 CFR 4.86.

V.iii.2.B.2.i.  Evaluating Hearing Loss When Speech Discrimination Scores Are Not Appropriate or Cannot Be Obtained

When an examiner certifies that speech discrimination scores are not appropriate or cannot be obtained, typically indicated with a “cannot test (CNT)” designation on examination, in accordance with 38 CFR 4.85(c) use Table VIA in 38 CFR 4.85(h).
 
Example:  An examiner indicates that speech discrimination scores are not appropriate due to inconsistent results.

V.iii.2.B.2.j.  Using VBMS-R Decision Tools in Hearing Impairment Claims

The Veterans Benefits Management System – Rating (VBMS-R) includes embedded calculators for hearing loss and tinnitus and ear diseases to help decision makers assign correct evaluations and generate required narrative explanation.  The calculator output is placed in the rating Narrative.
 
For the purpose of assigning a disability percentage for hearing loss always enter air conduction results into the hearing loss calculator.
 
References:  For more information on
VBMS-R, see the VBMS-R User Guide (also available within the application and accessible by selecting “Help”), and
the prohibition against using bone conduction results, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.l.

V.iii.2.B.2.k.  Audiometric Values Above 105 Decibels

If audiometric testing results contain a value above 105 decibels, enter the value into the hearing loss calculator at no higher than 105 decibels for the purpose of determining the puretone threshold average as directed by VA’s Handbook of Standard Procedures and Best Practices for Audiology Compensation and Pension Examinations.
 
Example:  Findings of loss of 115 decibels at the 4000 Hz frequency level will be entered as 105 decibels into the hearing loss calculator.

V.iii.2.B.2.l.  Bone Conduction Results

The Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire specifies when examiners will measure bone conduction results. 
 
Bone conduction is used for diagnostic purposes only.  Do not enter it into the hearing loss calculator regardless of the type of hearing loss and regardless of whether the evidence may contain an examiner’s comment that bone conduction results are a better indicator of a particular individual’s hearing loss.
 
References:  For more information on
the Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire, see the Disability Benefits Questionnaires Switchboard
special monthly compensation (SMC) based on deafness having absence of air and bone conduction, see M21-1, Part VIII, iv, 4.A.4.h, and
hearing loss and tinnitus examination report review, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.c.

V.iii.2.B.2.m.  Hearing Impairment Due to Meniere’s Disease

Meniere’s Disease is characterized by episodic attacks with subsequent subsiding of symptoms following the attack.  A Veteran may be totally deaf during the attack with return to normal hearing when the attack ends.  Therefore, in evaluating hearing impairment under 38 CFR 4.87, diagnostic code (DC) 6205, the puretone thresholds or speech discrimination percentages are not required to meet the provisions of 38 CFR 3.385 as hearing impairment associated with Meniere’s Disease is often transient.
 
Important:  In some cases, hearing loss may not recede following an attack of Meniere’s Disease and instead results in a permanent loss of hearing that meets the definition of hearing impairment under 38 CFR 3.385.  In such circumstances, award benefits under the DC that results in the highest percentage for the Veteran.  
Reference:  For more information on evaluating Meniere’s Disease, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.4.d and e.

V.iii.2.B.2.n.  Compensation Payable for Paired Organs Under 38 CFR 3.383

Even if only one ear is service-connected (SC), compensation may be payable under 38 CFR 3.383 for the other ear, as if SC, if the Veteran’s hearing impairment
is compensable to a degree of 10 percent or more in the SC ear, and
meets the provisions of 38 CFR 3.385 in the nonservice-connected (NSC) ear.
Important:  When the above entitling criteria do not apply for the NSC ear, the hearing in the NSC ear should be considered normal for purposes of computing the SC disability rating.
 
Reference:  For more information on compensation payable for paired SC and NSC organs, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 7.A.

V.iii.2.B.2.o.  Earlier Effective Date of Increase for Hearing Loss 

Assignment of effective date in claims for increased evaluation for hearing loss is controlled by 38 CFR 3.400(o).
38 CFR 4.85 pertaining to evaluation of hearing impairment does not control the effective date of a claim for increased evaluation.  
An increased evaluation for hearing loss may be assigned from a date prior to the date the Veteran received a VA audiological examination when evidence dated prior to the examination demonstrates that an increase in disability actually occurred, and the hearing loss demonstrated prior to the date of the examination is consistent with the findings shown by the examination. 
Note:  This will generally require a medical opinion indicating that evidence prior to the date of the examination is consistent with the results of the later, compliant VA examination upon which that increase was shown.
 
References:  For more information on effective dates for 
increased evaluations for hearing loss when required tests were not performed on prior examinations, see Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet.App. 219 (2015), and 
claims for increase, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.5.

V.iii.2.B.2.p.  Determining the Need for Reexamination

Use the table below to determine whether reexamination is necessary.
 
Note:  A single examination is often sufficient to meet the qualifying conditions of permanence under 38 CFR 3.327.
 
If …
Then …
the extent of hearing loss in an individual claim has been satisfactorily established by an examination
do not routinely schedule reexamination.
the Veteran has hearing loss evaluated 100 percent under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6100 with a numeric designation of XI & XI
permanency can be conceded, and
SMC awarded unless extenuating circumstances are present.
Note:  If hearing loss is functional, such as psychogenic, schedule at least one future examination to ensure that permanency is established before awarding SMC.
there is evidence that the hearing loss is likely to improve materially in the future
schedule a reexamination, and
include justification for such reexamination in the Reasons for Decision part of the rating decision.
the Veteran has had middle ear surgery
consider that hearing acuity will have reached a stable level one year after surgery, and
schedule reexamination for one year after such surgery under 38 CFR 3.327.


3.  Tinnitus
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about tinnitus, including 
sympathetic reading of tinnitus claims 
requesting medical opinions for tinnitus 
interpreting medical opinions involving tinnitus, and 
applying liberalizing provisions for tinnitus. 

Change Date

April 9, 2019

V.iii.2.B.3.a.  Sympathetic Reading of Tinnitus Claims

In cases where only tinnitus is claimed but the evidence shows the presence of hearing loss that may be related to an in-service event or injury or due to some other SC condition, solicit a claim for SC for hearing loss.  
 
If, upon solicitation, a claimant submits a claim for SC for hearing loss and the evidence of record supports SC, use the date the claim for SC for hearing loss was received for effective date purposes.
 
Similarly, where only tinnitus is claimed but SC has been previously granted for hearing loss, and the evidence of record shows that the hearing loss may have worsened, solicit a claim for reevaluation of hearing loss.  For effective date purposes the date of claim will be the date of filing after solicitation, not the date of claim for tinnitus.
 
By contrast to the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.a, a claim for SC that is phrased as being for “tinnitus” generally should not be interpreted as raising a claim for SC (or an increased evaluation) for hearing loss. 
 
This is because tinnitus has a specific definition (a subjectively perceived sound in one ear, both ears, or in the head) so a claim asserting that specific condition is generally unambiguous. 
 
Important:  Although claims for SC for tinnitus are not automatically or routinely going to raise an additional claim for SC for hearing loss, rarely there may be ambiguities that will require consideration of a claim for hearing loss in circumstances parallel to those addressed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.a.
 
Example:  An original claim describes the disability claimed only as “tinnitus.”  However, a statement submitted in connection with the claim reads “ringing in the ears (tinnitus); problems understanding what people are saying since tanker duty in service.”  The additional statement is reasonably read as meaning that the Veteran’s claim for benefits is also premised on problems hearing since service..
 
References:  For more information on
sympathetic reading doctrine and issues within the scope of a claim, see
38 CFR 3.155(d), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.c
reviewing claims for SC for hearing loss in which tinnitus is identified but not claimed, see M21-1 Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.a
the duty to investigate SC for an unclaimed primary disability when a secondary relationship to a claimed disability is shown, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.3.g, and
Delisio v. Shinseki, 25. Vet.App. 45 (2011), and
soliciting claims for unclaimed, chronic disabilities, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2.

V.iii.2.B.3.b.  Requesting Medical Opinions for Tinnitus

A medical opinion is not required to establish direct SC for claimed tinnitus if
STRs document the original complaints and/or diagnosis of tinnitus
there is current medical evidence of a diagnosis of tinnitus or the Veteran competently and credibly reports current tinnitus, and
the Veteran claims continuity of tinnitus since service or there are records or other competent and credible evidence of continuity of tinnitus diagnosis or symptomatology.
Exception:  An opinion may be necessary in the fact pattern above if evidence suggests a superseding post-service cause of current tinnitus.
 
A tinnitus examination may also be necessary if the STRs do not document tinnitus but
there is evidence establishing noise exposure or another in-service event, injury, or disease (for example ear infections, use of ototoxic medication, head injury, barotrauma, or other tympanic trauma) that is medically accepted as a potential cause of tinnitus, and
there is a competent diagnosis or competent report of current tinnitus.
Notes: 
A diagnosis of tinnitus is a medical determination; a layperson is not competent to render a diagnosis without appropriate medical training and/or background.  A layperson is competent to testify to what he/she experiences or perceives – namely the perception of sounds in his/her own ear(s) or head.  Accordingly, this is lay testimony and therefore is NOT sufficient, in and of itself, to establish a medically-confirmed diagnosis of tinnitus for the purposes of awarding SC.  However, consider credibility and weight of the evidence in deciding whether to accept lay testimony as evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service or a present disability. 
The Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire tinnitus-only examination includes a number of options for examiner opinions on etiology.  The examination may be conducted by an audiologist or non-audiologist clinician.
Only ask the audiologist to offer an opinion about the association to hearing loss if hearing loss is concurrently claimed or already SC. 
Give consideration to relevant lay evidence describing in-service complaints, a current disability, and/or a link between an in-service event and a current disability.
Example:  A Veteran submits a claim for tinnitus six years after discharge. STRs show one instance of tinnitus.  The Veteran did not submit a lay statement of continuity.  There is no post service medical evidence of continuity concerning tinnitus or tinnitus symptoms.
 
An examination and medical opinion are needed.
Though tinnitus is a condition listed under 38 CFR 3.309(a), it is sometimes acute and transitory.  In most cases, the cause of tinnitus is unknown.  Tinnitus can be associated with hearing loss, exposure to loud noise, ear disease, head injury (traumatic brain injury), cerebrovascular disease, tumors, certain medications, and many other medical conditions. 
In accordance with 38 CFR 3.303(b), continuity of symptomatology is required when the condition noted during service is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where chronicity may be legitimately questioned.  When the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim.  Because the chronicity in this example is not adequately supported, granting this claim without an examination would be premature. 
Adversely, because the threshold for ordering an audiological examination is very low, denying this claim without an examination would be inappropriate.  For this example, an examination and medical opinion must be ordered.     
References:  For more information on 
requesting examinations in audiological claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.1.a-d, and
assessing lay evidence to establish the occurrence of an in-service event or injury, see
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.B
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.B
38 CFR 3.304(d), and
Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

V.iii.2.B.3.c.  Interpreting Medical Opinions Involving Tinnitus

Use the table below when considering an examiner’s medical opinion in a case involving tinnitus.
 
If ...
Then ...
the examiner states tinnitus is a symptom of hearing loss
evaluate tinnitus separately under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6260 if the hearing loss is determined to be SC, and
establish SC for tinnitus on a direct, not secondary, basis.
Notes:
If the hearing loss is SC, and the tinnitus is a symptom of the hearing loss, we concede that the hearing loss and tinnitus result from the same etiology. Therefore, SC is warranted for tinnitus on a direct basis in these cases.
Under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6260, a single 10-percent disability evaluation should be assigned for tinnitus, regardless of whether tinnitus is perceived as unilateral, bilateral, or in the head. Separate evaluations for tinnitus for each ear cannot be assigned.
the examiner
states tinnitus is not related to hearing loss, or
is unable to determine the etiology within reasonable certainty, or
there is no hearing loss
determine, based on all the evidence of record, whether or not the etiology of tinnitus requires further assessment by one of more additional examinations.
 
Note:  The type and need for any additional examination(s) will depend on the Veteran’s claim as to the cause of tinnitus.
 
Examples:
If the Veteran claims tinnitus due to hearing loss, and the examiner says they are not related, no further action is needed.
If Veteran claims tinnitus due to another condition (such as head injury, hypertension, and so on, which would be outside the scope of the audiologist), it might be appropriate to request
a general medical, ears/nose/throat (ENT), or other examination, and
an opinion as to the causation of tinnitus.
the examiner states that tinnitus is related to noise exposure or an event, injury, or illness in service
evaluate all the evidence of record
determine if the examiner’s opinion is consistent with the evidence, and
take action according to the table below.
If …
Then …
the examiner’s opinion is consistent with the evidence of record
award SC on a direct basis.
the examiner’s opinion is not consistent with the evidence of record, and
the evidence VA provided to the examiner was incorrect or insufficient
return the exam for clarification, and
provide the examiner with all necessary information.
Note:  When the corrected exam is received, consider the opinion together with all other evidence of record to determine if SC is warranted.
the examiner’s opinion is not consistent with the evidence of record, and
the information the Veteran provided to the examiner was also inconsistent with the record
consider the opinion together with all other evidence of record to determine whether SC is warranted.

 
References:  For more information on
when to use lay evidence, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.B
Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006)
Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed.Cir. 2007), and
weighing evidence, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A
Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427 (2006)
Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet.App. 171 (2005), and
Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 548 (1993).

V.iii.2.B.3.d.  Applying Liberalizing Provisions for Tinnitus

38 CFR 4.87, DC 6260 was revised effective June 10, 1999.  In the standard for a 10-percent evaluation for tinnitus, the change substituted the word “recurrent” for “persistent.”  It also deleted language indicating that compensable tinnitus must be a manifestation of “head injury, concussion, or acoustic trauma.” 
 
The regulatory revision to this DC was liberalizing.  Therefore the provisions of 38 CFR 3.114(a) are applicable when assigning an effective date. 
Reference:  For more information on assigning effective dates based on liberalizing changes in law, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.f.

  
 4.  Peripheral Vestibular and Other Ear Disorders
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about peripheral vestibular and other ear disorders, including
definitions of dizziness, vertigo, pre-syncope, and disequilibrium
SC of vertigo
peripheral vestibular disorders
Meniere’s Disease
cerebellar gait in Meniere’s Disease, and
ear infections.

Change Date

April 9, 2019

V.iii.2.B.4.a.  Definitions: Dizziness, Vertigo, Pre-syncope, and Disequilibrium

Dizziness is a sensation or perception of unsteadiness, imbalance, or potential unconsciousness. 
 
Vertigo is a sensation of rotation or spinning movement – either the self or surrounding objects – when there is no actual movement.  Vertigo is best understood as a variety of dizziness where the feeling of unsteadiness or imbalance is due to the sense of spinning. 
 
Presyncope is a feeling of losing consciousness or blacking out.  The terms lightheadness and faintness are essentially synonymous although lightheadedness may also be used to describe a feeling of disconnectedness between the head and body rather than actual impending unconsciousness.
 
Disequilibrium means loss of equilibrium (balance, stability, physical orientation).  A disability causing disequilibrium is manifested by symptoms that fall under the umbrella of dizziness (including vertigo or presyncope).  

V.iii.2.B.4.b.  SC of Vertigo

Vertigo is generally considered a symptom of another disability, such as a peripheral vestibular disorder or a brain disorder.  However SC can be granted for vertigo as provided in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.1.e.

V.iii.2.B.4.c.  Peripheral Vestibular Disorders

38 CFR 4.87, DC 6204 provides 10-percent and 30-percent evaluations for peripheral vestibular disorders based on dizziness and/or staggering. 
 
A note following the diagnostic criteria states “objective findings supporting the diagnosis of vestibular disequilibrium are required before a compensable evaluation can be assigned …” [Emphasis Added]
 
Important:  The note in the diagnostic criteria does not mean that the subjective perceptions that define dizziness must be objectively measured or observed for a 10-percent evaluation to be assigned.  It means that the diagnosis of the current chronic disorder manifested by vestibular disequilibrium must be supported by objective findings (or have been supported by such findings when the current disorder was SC). 
 
Objective findings include quantitative testing such as electronystagmography (ENG) and auditory brainstem evoked response (ABR) but are not limited to such tests.  A variety of clinical examination maneuvers also are used to test for disequilibrium and positive results to examination maneuvers are also considered objective evidence in support of the diagnosis of vestibular disequilibrium. 
 
The important consideration is whether the evidentiary record shows that objective examination results or other tests were cited in supported the diagnosis of the peripheral vestibular disorder manifested by disequilibrium.
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating vertigo as a symptom of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and the prohibition against evaluating vertigo separately from TBI, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.1.i.

V.iii.2.B.4.d.   Meniere’s Disease

Meniere’s Disease (endolymphatic hydrops) is to be rated
under the criteria in 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6205 which consider frequency of attacks of symptoms including hearing loss (with or without tinnitus) and vertigo and cerebellar gait, or
by assigning separate evaluations for hearing impairment (38 CFR 4.85, DC 6100), tinnitus (38 CFR 4.87, DC 6210), and vertigo (rating vertigo as a peripheral vestibular disorder under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6204).
Use whichever approach results in a higher evaluation.  Do not separately assign an evaluation under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6205 and a rating for hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo. 
 
Reference:  For information on assessment of hearing impairment when evaluating Meniere’s Disease under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6205, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.2.l.

V.iii.2.B.4.e.  Cerebellar Gait in Meniere’s Disease

The 60-percent and 100-percent criteria in 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6205 for Meniere’s Disease refer to cerebellar gait. 
 
A cerebellar gait is a wide-based gait with lateral veering, a slow, jerky and irregular cadence, variable stride length, variability of foot placement from step to step, postural adjustments and propensity to lose balance.  In the context of Meniere’s Disease, the term alludes to staggering associated with vertigo. 

V.iii.2.B.4.f.  Ear Infections

If the disease of one ear, such as chronic catarrhal otitis media or otosclerosis, is held as the result of service, the subsequent development of similar pathology in the other ear must be held due to the same cause if
the time element is not manifestly excessive, a few years at most, and
there has been no intercurrent infection to cause the additional disability.
Note:  If there is continuous SC infection of the upper respiratory tract, the time cited for the purpose of service connecting infection of the second ear should be extended indefinitely.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 3 - Infectious Diseases, Immune Disorders, and Nutritional Deficiencies
Article ID: 554400000014467
Updated Oct 02, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics: 
 
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Rating Principles for Infectious Diseases, Immune Disorders, and Nutritional Deficiencies
2
Tropical Diseases
3
Rheumatic Fever
4
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-Related Illness
5
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
6
Novel Coronavirus Infection (COVID-19)
 

  
1.  General Rating Principles for Infectious Diseases, Immune Disorders, and Nutritional Deficiencies

Introduction

This topic contains information about the general rating principles for infectious diseases, immune disorders, and nutritional deficiencies, including
definition of
infectious diseases
immune disorders, and
nutritional deficiencies
revisions of the infectious diseases, immune disorders, and nutritional deficiencies rating schedule
evaluations under the infectious diseases general rating formula, and
evaluating long-term health effects of 38 CFR 3.317 infectious diseases. 

Change Date

August 12, 2019

V.iii.3.1.a.  Definition:  Infectious Diseases 

Infectious diseases are disorders caused by organisms, such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, or parasites.
Example:  Malaria.
Note:  Consider presumptive service connection (SC) for infectious diseases listed in
38 CFR 3.309(b) based on tropical service
38 CFR 3.309(c) based on confirmed former prisoner of war (FPOW) status, and 
38 CFR 3.317(c) based on service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Gulf War or on or after September 19, 2001, in Afghanistan.
References:  For more information on presumptive SC for
tropical diseases, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 1
FPOW disabilities, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 2.D, and
infectious diseases under 38 CFR 3.317, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart ii, 1.D.

V.iii.3.1.b.  Definition:  Immune Disorders 

Immune disorders cause abnormally low activity or overactivity of the immune system.  In cases of immune system overactivity, the body attacks and damages its own tissues (autoimmune diseases).  Immune deficiency diseases decrease the body's ability to fight invaders, causing vulnerability to infections.  Immune disorders can be caused by organisms, use of medications, or other chronic conditions.
 
Example:  Systemic lupus erythematosus.
 
Note:  Consider presumptive SC for immune disorders listed in 38 CFR 3.309(a).

V.iii.3.1.c.  Definition:  Nutritional Deficiencies 

Nutritional deficiencies occur when the body is unable to obtain the necessary amount of a nutrient that is required for proper health.  These deficiencies can be caused by diet, surgical residuals, genetics, environment, or other diseases.
 
Example:  Beriberi.
 
Note:  Consider presumptive SC for disabilities listed in SC 38 CFR 3.309(c) based on based on confirmed FPOW status.
 
Reference:  For more information on presumptive SC for FPOW disabilities, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 2.D.3.

V.iii.3.1.d.  Revisions of the Infectious Diseases, Immune Disorders, and Nutritional Deficiencies Rating Schedule 

The criteria for rating disabilities based on infectious diseases, immune disorders, and nutritional deficiencies in 38 CFR 4.88b were most recently updated effective
August 11, 2019, and
August 30, 1996.
The purpose of these updates was to
incorporate medical advances
update medical terminology
add disabilities not previously included, and
refine rating criteria.
Note:  These updates were not liberalizing changes in the rating criteria.
 
References:  For more information on
these and other historical changes to 38 CFR 4.88b, see
38 CFR 4, Appendix A, and
38 CFR 4.88b (Historical), and
effect of rating schedule readjustment, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.i.

V.iii.3.1.e.  Evaluations Under the Infectious Diseases General Rating Formula 

Prior to the August 11, 2019, rating schedule revision, each infectious disease listed under 38 CFR 4.88b had its own prescribed rating criteria. 
 
Effective August 11, 2019, 38 CFR 4.88b contains a general rating formula applicable to multiple infectious diseases, regardless of etiology.  
 
For each diagnostic code (DC) that refers to this general rating formula, decision makers must
assign the prescribed evaluation during the active disease phase, and thereafter, 
assign
a 0-percent evaluation for the infectious disease under the relevant 38 CFR 4.88b DC, and
evaluations for any residual disability of the infection within the appropriate body system as indicated by the notes in the evaluation criteria. 
Notes: 
Regardless of whether resolution occurs spontaneously or because of treatment, long-term disability in such situations results from residual functional impairment of the body systems affected by the infectious disease, rather than the infection itself.
Infectious diseases for both the initial diagnosis and any relapse of active infection must be confirmed by diagnostic testing specific to the disease.

V.iii.3.1.f.  Evaluating Long-Term Health Effects of 38 CFR 3.317 Infectious Diseases 

As applicable, consider the long-term health effects potentially associated with infectious diseases as listed in 38 CFR 3.317(d), specifically for brucellosis, Campylobacter jejuni, Coxiella burnetii (Q fever), malaria, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, nontyphoid Salmonella, Shigella, visceral leishmaniasis, and West Nile virus.
 
Reference:  For more information on presumptive SC for infectious diseases under 38 CFR 3.317, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart ii, 1.D.

  2.  Tropical Diseases  

Introduction

This topic contains information about tropical diseases, including
specific tropical diseases
obtaining information about tropical diseases
incubation periods of tropical diseases, and
considering SC for tropical diseases not of record.

Change Date

December 13, 2005

V.iii.3.2.a.Specific Tropical Diseases

The following tropical diseases, among others, may require attention in view of their incidence in areas of foreign service:
bacterial infections, including
bacillary dysentery
cholera
Hansen’s disease (leprosy)
Oroya fever
pinta
plague
relapsing fever, and
yaws
viral infections, including yellow fever
roundworm parasitic infections, including
dracontiasis
filariasis (Bancroft’s type)
hookworm infection
loiasis, and
onchocerciasis
other parasitic infections, including
amebiasis
blackwater fever
leishmaniasis
malaria, and
schistosomiasis.
Notes:
Rate amebiasis and schistosomiasis under the digestive system.
Rate pinta, verruga peruana (a late residual of Oroya fever), onchoceriasis, oriental sore, and espundia (Old World cutaneous and American (New World) mucocutaneous leishmaniasis) under diseases of the skin.
Reference:  For more information on tropical diseases, see
38 CFR 3.307(a)(4)
38 CFR 3.309(b), and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 1.

V.iii.3.2.b.Obtaining Information About Tropical Diseases

An understanding of the locality, incubation period, and residuals of tropical diseases may be obtained from standard treatises.
Reference: For more information on tropical diseases, see The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.

V.iii.3.2.c.Incubation Periods of Tropical Diseases

The table below contains the incubation periods of some tropical diseases.
Tropical Disease
Incubation Period
dracontiasis (Guinea worm disease)
14 months
filariasis, Bancroft’s type
up to 8 to 12 months
kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis)
up to one year
Hansen’s disease (leprosy)
five years or more
loiasis, calabar swelling
three years
oriental sore, Old World cutaneous leishmaniasis
up to 18 months


V.iii.3.2.d.Considering SC for Tropical Diseases Not of Record

When considering SC for tropical diseases not of record during service, always
consider tropical residence other than that during military service, and
consult standard texts for disease factors, such as
locality of confinement
early symptoms
course of the disease, and
periods of incubation.
Reference:  For more information on developing claims for SC for tropical diseases, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 1.

 
3.  Rheumatic Fever
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about rheumatic fever, including
definition of rheumatic fever
complications of rheumatic fever
the prognosis of rheumatic fever, and
considering the effects of rheumatic heart disease.

Change Date

December 13, 2005

V.iii.3.3.a.Definition: Rheumatic Fever

Rheumatic fever is an acute, subacute, or chronic systemic disease that, for unknown reasons, is self-limiting or may lead to slowly progressive valve deformity of the heart.
Reference:  For more information on evaluating rheumatic fever, see 38 CFR 4.88b, DC 6309.

V.iii.3.3.b.Complications of Rheumatic Fever

Complications of rheumatic fever include
cardiac arrhythmias
pericarditis
rheumatic pneumonitis
pulmonary embolism
pulmonary infarction
valve deformity, and
in extreme cases, congestive heart failure.

V.iii.3.3.c.Prognosis of Rheumatic Fever

The prognosis is good in cases of rheumatic fever.
If the age of onset is postadolescence, residual heart damage
occurs in less than 20 percent of the cases, and
is generally less severe than if the onset is during childhood.
Note:  Mitral valve insufficiency is the most common residual.

V.iii.3.3.d.Considering the Effects of Rheumatic Heart Disease

For more information on the effects of rheumatic heart disease, see 
38 CFR 4.104, DC 7000, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.1.g.

 
4.  HIV-Related Illness
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about HIV-related illness, including 
definition of 
HIV, and
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
how HIV infection is diagnosed
definition of CD4 T cells
HIV transmission
definition of approved medication(s)
rating considerations for HIV-related illness, and
rating AIDS.

Change Date

August 12, 2019

V.iii.3.4.a.Definition:HIV

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is spread through body fluids that affect specific cells of the immune system, called CD4 cells, or T cells.  Over time, HIV can destroy so many of these cells that the body cannot fight off infections and disease.
 
Reference:  For more information on rating HIV, see
38 CFR 4.88b, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 3.4.g.

V.iii.3.4.b.  Definition:  AIDS

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a secondary infection and results from HIV infection.  It is not a single distinct disease, but rather a disorder characterized by a severe suppression of the immune system, rendering the body susceptible to and unable to fight off a variety of normally manageable infections, cancers, and other diseases. 
 
Patients with AIDS suffer infections called “opportunistic” because they take the opportunity to attack when the immune system is weak.  This may involve the intestinal tract, lungs, brain, eyes, and other organs, as well as debilitating weight loss, diarrhea, and neurologic conditions.
 
Important:  If a Veteran has HIV and one or more of the following opportunistic infections, regardless of the CD4 (T4) count, the Veteran is considered to have a diagnosis of AIDS:
candidiasis of the bronchi, trachea, esophagus, or lungs
invasive cervical cancer
coccidioidomycosis 
cryptococcosis 
cryptosporidiosis 
cytomegalovirus (particularly CMV retinitis) 
HIV-related encephalopathy 
herpes simplex-chronic ulcers for greater than one month, or bronchitis, pneumonia, or esophagitis 
histoplasmosis 
isosporiasis (chronic intestinal) 
Kaposi’s sarcoma
lymphoma
mycobacterium avium complex 
tuberculosis 
pneumocystis jirovecii (carinii) pneumonia 
pneumonia, recurrent 
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy 
salmonella septicemia, recurrent
toxoplasmosis of the brain, and
wasting syndrome due to HIV.
Reference:  For more information on rating AIDs, see
38 CFR 4.88b, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 3.4.h.

V.iii.3.4.c.  How HIV Is Diagnosed

HIV is primarily detected by testing a person’s blood for the presence of antibodies (disease-fighting proteins) to HIV.  Two antibody tests, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Western blot assay (a confirmatory test), are used.  An alternative test, indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA), may also be used.
 
The ELISA and Western blot may be negative for as long as three to six months after exposure to HIV.
 
If a person is highly likely to be infected with HIV, but both tests are negative, a test for the presence of HIV itself in the blood may be done.

V.iii.3.4.d.  Definition: CD4 T Cells

A CD4 T cell is a type of lymphocyte, the white blood cell that bears the major responsibility for the activities of the immune system.  The other major type is the B cell.  Together, they fight off invading viruses, bacteria, parasites, and fungi.  The "T4," "helper-T," or "CD4" cell helps regulate and direct immune activity.
 
Notes:
A healthy, uninfected person has 800 to 1200 (or 500 to 1500 by some references) CD4 T cells per cubic millimeter of blood. 
During HIV, the number of these cells in the blood progressively declines. 
When the count falls below 200, the person is vulnerable to the opportunistic infections and cancers that typify AIDS. 

V.iii.3.4.e.  HIV Transmission

Major means of HIV transmission are
sexual contact
infected blood, and
needle stick accidents.
Notes: 
No evidence exists that HIV is transmitted through
saliva, sweat, tears, urine, or feces
casual contact such as the sharing of food utensils, towels and bedding, swimming pools, telephones, or toilet seats, or
biting insects such as mosquitoes, flies, ticks, fleas, bees, wasps, or bedbugs.
If there is evidence indicating that the HIV-related illness was the result of intravenous drug abuse, ensure that the authorization activity has conducted a willful misconduct/line-of-duty (LOD) administrative decision prior to rating.
There is no presumptive SC provision for HIV.  Veterans must establish SC under other provisions, such as direct SC under 38 CFR 3.303 by establishing an in-service event, injury, or disease as the cause of HIV.
References:  For more information on
willful misconduct and LOD determinations, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.C, and
establishing direct SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.

V.iii.3.4.f.  Definition: Approved Medication(s)

When rating an HIV case, the term approved medication(s) includes treatment regimens and medications prescribed as part of a research protocol at an accredited medical institution.  

V.iii.3.4.g.  Rating Considerations for HIV-Related Illness

When evaluating HIV-related illness, consider
severity and frequency of constitutional symptoms
use of approved medication(s)
T4 cell count, and
the development of AIDS-related opportunistic infection or neoplasm.
Notes: 
Only patients with HIV who are asymptomatic should be rated at 0 percent. 
An evaluation of 30 percent should be the minimum if there are recurrent constitutional symptoms, even if they have responded to appropriate treatment.
In rating HIV, consider the following:
rating may be based on 38 CFR 4.88b, DC 6351 criteria, or
separate evaluations may be warranted under the appropriate diagnostic codes (DCs) if other defined conditions due to HIV infection or its treatment develop.  This could include psychiatric illness, central nervous system manifestations, opportunistic infections, and neoplasms.
Examples:
Enlarged lymph nodes and fatigue (HIV-related constitutional symptoms) warrant a 10-percent evaluation; however, if pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) or other symptoms develop, the appropriate evaluation could be 30 percent if the symptoms go into remission and then reoccur (recurrent symptoms) or 60 percent if they do not respond to treatment (refractory symptoms).
If there is a CD4 count of 400, the Veteran is on HAART (highly active antiretroviral therapy), and there are symptoms of depression but no other significant signs or symptoms of the infection or its treatment, it would be appropriate to assign 10 percent.  However, if the depression rises to the level of a diagnosed major depression or dysthymic disorder, consider evaluating it separately as a secondary condition, with the potential of a higher rating.  The HIV infection would still warrant a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.88b, DC 6351, based on findings not related to symptoms of depression—low CD4 count and treatment.
Reference:  For more information on avoidance of pyramiding, see
38 CFR 4.14
Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994), and 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b.

V.iii.3.4.h.  Rating AIDS

Once a Veteran develops AIDS, evaluate the specific findings based on the table below.
In instances of ...
Note that ...
opportunistic infections
once an AIDS-related opportunistic infection or neoplasm appears, the rating will be 60 percent or above
many of the opportunistic infections will warrant a 100- percent evaluation, at least for a time (tuberculosis, lymphoma, etc.), and
special monthly compensation will be a frequent consideration.
cancer
it should be rated separately, if advantageous to the Veteran, as long as its symptomatologies are not also used to support a 60- or 100-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.88b, DC 6351.
episodic problems
the possibility exists that a particular examination may have been done at a time between episodes of opportunistic infections when findings are relatively few, and 
the overall history for the past year or so should be considered when rating since some AIDS complications can be episodic.
 
Reference:  For more information on rating evaluations for AIDS, see 38 CFR 4.88b.

                                 
                               
5.  Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
      

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about chronic fatigue syndrome, including
definition of chronic fatigue syndrome, and
rating considerations for chronic fatigue syndrome.

Change Date

August 12, 2019

V.iii.3.5.a.Definition:Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
 
Chronic fatigue syndrome is a complex, multisymptom, debilitating illness characterized by physical and mental manifestations.

V.iii.3.5.b.  Rating Considerations for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
 
When rating chronic fatigue syndrome, keep in mind that a diagnosis requires the following:
new onset of debilitating fatigue severe enough to reduce daily activity to less than 50 percent of the usual level for at least six months, and
the exclusion, by way of a thorough evaluation, of all other clinical conditions that may produce similar symptoms based on history, physical examination, and laboratory tests.
In addition, six or more of the following criteria must be met:
acute onset of the condition
low grade fever
sore throat with no secretions (nonexudative pharyngitis)
palpable or tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes
generalized muscle aches or weakness
fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise
headaches (of a type, severity, or pattern that is different from headaches in the pre-morbid state)
migratory joint pains
neuropsychological symptoms, and
sleep disturbance.
Note:  Consider presumptive SC for chronic fatigue syndrome as a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness under 38 CFR 3.317(a).
Reference:  For more information on chronic fatigue syndrome, see
38 CFR 4.88a 
38 CFR 4.88b, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.g.

6.  COVID-19

Introduction

This topic contains information about rating decisions for COVID-19, including
definition of COVID-19
use of the COVID-19 special issue indicator
active vs. acute COVID-19
residuals of COVID-19
delayed onset of COVID-19 residuals
disabilities resulting from COVID-19 vaccination
hospitalization and convalescent ratings for COVID-19 residuals, and
applicable theories of SC for COVID-19 residuals. 

Change Date

August 2, 2022

V.iii.3.6.a.  Definition:  COVID-19 

Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) is a disease caused by a virus called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).  COVID-19 may also be referred to as any of the following:
coronavirus, or
coronavirus disease.
Note:  Consider claims for SC for COVID-19 under both a presumptive and direct basis.  
References:  For more information on
presumptive SC for COVID-19, see
38 U.S.C. 1164, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 10, and
considering unclaimed theories of SC, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.f.

V.iii.3.6.b.  Use of the COVID-19 Special Issue Indicator 

The COVID-19 special issue indicator referenced in M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 10.3.a should be used for all COVID-19 claims regardless of the theory of SC being utilized in the claim.
Reference:  For more information on the use of special issue indicators, see M21-4, Appendix E, 2.

V.iii.3.6.c.  Active vs. Acute COVID-19 

COVID-19 is an acute infectious disease.  As an acute infectious disease, COVID-19 should only be rated based on chronic residual condition(s).  If a Veteran previously had COVID-19 and is currently asymptomatic, deny the claim based on no evidence of a current, chronic disability.
Important:  Do not arbitrarily determine that a chronic disability is not demonstrated without relying on competent medical evidence.
References:  For more information on
considering acute and transitory conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.h, and
handling allegations of exposure to COVID-19, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 10.3.b, and
M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.C.2.b and c. 

V.iii.3.6.d.  Residuals of COVID-19

38 CFR 4.88b advises to rate any residual disability of infection within the appropriate body system.  As applicable, consider the long-term health effects potentially associated with the infectious disease.  If COVID-19 was diagnosed and resolved during a period of qualifying service or any applicable presumptive period, any chronic residuals attributable to the disease may be SC.
Assign the most appropriate DC for residuals based on general rating principles.
Serious long-term complications may include, but are not limited to, the following types of issues:
respiratory
genitourinary (residuals of acute kidney injury)
cardiovascular (inflammation of the heart muscle, heart attack, stroke, blood clots)
skin (rash, hair loss)
audiological (hearing problems)
loss of sense of smell and/or taste
neurological, and
psychiatric (depression, anxiety, changes in mood).
Important:
Since the long-term effects of this disease are still being studied, decision makers must rely on the expertise of medical professionals to determine whether the chronic residual is due to COVID-19.  A medical nexus opinion will generally be required to determine whether a disability is a chronic residual of COVID-19.
Evaluations for pension purposes must be based on permanent residuals of COVID-19.
Reference:  For more information on requesting examinations in claims for SC for residuals of COVID-19, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 10.5.

V.iii.3.6.e.  Delayed Onset of COVID-19 Residuals 

Post-COVID-19 conditions are a wide range of new, returning, or ongoing health problems people can experience four weeks or more after first being infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.  If a Veteran is denied SC for COVID-19 due to a lack of a chronic residual disability, a condition may manifest later.
 
When a new or supplemental claim is submitted for a post-COVID chronic residual that manifested at a later date, consider SC for the claimed issue.  The claim(s) for the post-COVID-19 residual is sufficient new and relevant evidence in a supplemental claim scenario.  Request an examination and/or medical opinion, when otherwise warranted, to link the condition to the prior COVID-19 infection.
 
Example 1:  A Veteran with an in-service diagnosis of COVID-19 is denied entitlement to compensation because there is no evidence of a chronic residual.  Two months later, a new claim for headaches due to COVID-19 is received.  This is an initial claim for a new issue that may be associated with an in-service event.  Service treatment records are negative for headache complaints.  An exam and medical opinion may be needed to determine whether the claimed headaches are a chronic, post-COVID-19 residual disability.
 
Example 2:  A Veteran with an in-service diagnosis of COVID-19 is denied entitlement to compensation because there is no evidence of a chronic residual.  Two months later, a supplemental claim for COVID-19 is received with evidence of a new positive COVID-19 test.  There is no allegation or indication of a chronic condition.  The evidence is new and relevant, but continued denial is warranted because there is no evidence of a chronic residual disability.
 
References:  For more information on
the definitions of
initial claim, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.i, and
supplemental claim, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 1.A.4.j, and
new and relevant evidence, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.d.

V.iii.3.6.f.  Disabilities Resulting From COVID-19 Vaccination 

If evidence establishes that an individual suffers from a disabling condition as a result of receiving a COVID-19 vaccination, the disability is subject to SC under the general principles for direct SC.
Note:  If the vaccination-related residual is the result of vaccination received during a period of inactive duty training (IADT), the individual may be considered disabled by an “injury” incurred during such training.  Consequently, such an individual may be found to have incurred disability, on a direct basis, allowing recognition of the IADT period as a period of active service under 38 CFR 3.6.
Reference:  For more information on the requirements for IADT to be considered active service, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.f.

V.iii.3.6.g.  Hospitalization and Convalescent Ratings for COVID-19 Residuals 

If a Veteran is hospitalized due to a complication of COVID-19 for over 21 days, apply the provisions of 38 CFR 4.29 to assign a hospital rating.
Assign the hospital rating for the primary condition that warranted hospitalization.
If the primary cause of the hospitalization is unknown, consider reported symptoms and other evidence of record to determine the most appropriate disability for which to assign the hospitalization rating.
If the Veteran remains hospitalized at the time the claim is considered, assign an open-ended hospital evaluation as warranted.
Following the hospitalization, assign an appropriate schedular evaluation for any chronic residual, applying 38 CFR 4.31 when appropriate.
Note:  Application of 38 CFR 4.30 requires surgical treatment, which may occur for treatment of certain COVID-19 residuals.  However, do not apply the provisions of 38 CFR 4.30(a)(2) concerning the necessity of house confinement to a period of self-quarantine due to COVID-19 since self-quarantine would be unrelated to the surgical treatment.
References:  For more information on
hospitalization ratings, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.B, and
convalescent ratings, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.C.

V.iii.3.6.h.  Applicable Theories of SC for COVID-19 Residuals 

Consider theories of SC for COVID-19 raised by the Veteran or by the evidence of record in accordance with M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.f, and apply the most advantageous theory supported by the evidentiary record.
References:  For more information on
considering unclaimed theories of SC, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 1.A.2.f
effective date considerations specific to presumptive SC for COVID-19, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 10.6.f, and
maximizing benefits with effective date determinations, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.1.i.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 4, Section B - Tuberculosis
Article ID: 554400000180881
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Information on Tuberculosis
2
Arrested Tuberculosis
3
Exhibit: Examples of Ratings for Arrested Tuberculosis


  
1.  General Information on Tuberculosis
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about tuberculosis, including
tuberculosis classification standards
considering infection caused by other mycobacteria
diagnosing infection caused by other mycobacteria
classifying disease caused by other mycobacteria
considering chest x-rays under 38 CFR 3.370 and 38 CFR 3.371
referrals for x-ray interpretation under 38 CF. 3.370 and 38 CFR 3.371, and
processing claims based on tuberculin reaction.

Change Date

April 15, 2015

V.iii.4.B.1.a.  Tuberculosis Classification Standards

The following classification standards were adopted by the American Lung Association under The Diagnostic Standards and Classification of Tuberculosis in Adults and Children, 1999:
An individual is classified as Tuberculosis Suspect until diagnostic procedures are complete.  (Note:  Do not use the classification Tuberculosis Suspect for more than three months.)
Disease caused by other mycobacteria is classified as Other Mycobacterial Diseases.  (Note:  Disease caused by other mycobacteria is indistinguishable clinically, radiologically, and histologically from mycobacterium (M.) tuberculosis.)
Reference:  For more information on the classification standards, see TheDiagnostic Standards and Classification of Tuberculosis in Adults and Children, 1999.

V.iii.4.B.1.b.  Considering Infection Caused by Other Mycobacteria

Other mycobacteria that may commonly be involved as pathogens are
M. kansasii
M. intracellulare, and
M. scrofulaceum.
Note:  M. bovis is
rarely responsible for disease where there is effective control of tuberculosis in cattle and pasteurization of milk and milk products, and
indistinguishable from M. tuberculosis except by culture. 

V.iii.4.B.1.c.  Diagnosing Infection Caused by Other Mycobacteria

A definitive diagnosis for infection caused by other mycobacteria requires
evidence of disease (such as an infiltrate visible on a chest x-ray)
no other cause established by careful clinical and laboratory studies, and
either
appearance of the same strain of mycobacteria repeatedly, or
isolation of the mycobacteria from a closed lesion from which the specimen has been collected and handled under sterile conditions.
Note:  Diagnosis of other mycobacterial infection by skin test is not possible.  The current antigens for mycobacteria other than M. tuberculosis have high cross-reactivity and low specificity.

V.iii.4.B.1.d.  Classifying Disease Caused by Other Mycobacteria

With certain modifications, the classification for tuberculosis is adaptable for classifying other mycobacterial diseases.
When classifying mycobacterial diseases, do not use the following three categories used for tuberculosis
“no exposure, not infected”
“exposure, no evidence of infection,” or
“infection, without disease.”

V.iii.4.B.1.e.  Considering Chest X-Rays Under 38 CFR 3.370 and 38 CFR 3.371

If active pulmonary tuberculosis is claimed to be service-connected (SC) and entitlement is not established by other evidence, then consider the x-ray evidence in accordance with 38 CFR 3.370 and 38 CFR 3.371.
Reports of x-ray interpretations must be adequate for rating purposes.
Use the table below to determine which x-ray films are required to prove service connection (SC).
To prove ...
Films required are ...
direct SC
all service films.
presumptive SC
discharge film (or a service film used for this) and an adequate number of post-service films.


V.iii.4.B.1.f.  Referrals for X-Ray Interpretation Under 38 CFR 3.370 and 38 CFR 3.371

Only designees of the Under Secretary for Health are authorized to interpret x-ray films under 38 CFR 3.370 and 38 CFR 3.371.  Refer requests for interpretations to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) medical facility for the local regional office (RO).
 
Note:  If the local VA medical facility is not authorized to make such interpretations, the Director will keep the RO informed of the current location of the designated interpreter for the RO area.  In such a case, refer requests directly to the clinic, center, or hospital.

V.iii.4.B.1.g.  Processing Claims Based on Tuberculin Reaction

Reference:  For more information on claims based on positive tuberculin reaction, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, 2.A.1.

  
2.  Arrested Tuberculosis
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about arrested tuberculosis, including
processing 
graduated ratings in effect on August 19, 1968, and
ratings in effect after August 19, 1968
requesting examinations during the graduated rating period, and
processing 
notification of failure to follow treatment or submit to examination, and
cases of irregular discharge.

Change Date

August 3, 2011

V.iii.4.B.2.a.  Processing Graduated Ratings in Effect on August 19, 1968

For graduated ratings in effect on August 19, 1968,
award a total evaluation for two years after the date of complete arrest or inactivity established under 38 CFR 3.375(a)
as set forth under the general rating formula following 38 CFR 4.97, DC 6724 of the rating schedule
reduce the evaluation to 50 percent for four years, and
reduce the evaluation to 30 percent for another five years, and
after the expiration of the 11-year period
continue the 30-percent evaluation if far advanced active lesions exist
assign a 20-percent evaluation if there are moderately advanced lesions with continued disability, or
assign a 0-percent evaluation if the first two criteria do not apply.

V.iii.4.B.2.b.  Processing Ratings in Effect After August 19, 1968

If SC for pulmonary tuberculosis is established after August 19, 1968,
continue the 100-percent evaluation for one year after the date of inactivity established under 38 CFR 3.375(a), and
thereafter apply the general rating formula for residuals in the rating schedule under 38 CFR 4.97, DC 6731.

V.iii.4.B.2.c.  Requesting Examinations During the Graduated Rating Period

Do not request an examination for rating purposes during the period covered by the graduated ratings.

V.iii.4.B.2.d.  Processing Notification of Failure to Follow Treatment or Submit to Examination

Medical authorities will notify the RO of a Veteran’s failure to follow prescribed treatment or submit to examination requested for treatment purposes during the period of total disability following complete arrest of the tuberculosis.
After the notification is received, follow the due process procedures of 38 CFR 3.655 and furnish the Veteran a notice of proposed adverse action.  Upon expiration of the due process period
reduce the 100-percent evaluation to 50 percent by rating action, and
adjust the Veteran’s award as of the date of the last payment or the date indicated in the notice of proposed adverse action, whichever is later.
Notes: 
The reduction of the 100-percent evaluation upon failure to submit to examination or follow prescribed treatment is applicable only when the tuberculosis has reached a stage of complete arrest or inactivity.
If the Veteran complies with the request for examination during the original two-year time frame for the 100-percent graduated rating, restore the 100-percent rating effective the date of reduction.

V.iii.4.B.2.e.  Processing Cases of Irregular Discharge

Do not suspend or discontinue payments merely because a Veteran with active tuberculosis receives an irregular discharge.  An irregular discharge is received for disciplinary reasons, the refusal to accept or follow treatment, the refusal to accept transfer, or failure to return from an authorized absence.
In the case of irregular discharge,
continue the 100-percent evaluation based on activity, and
request an examination six months from the date of irregular discharge.
If the Veteran fails to report for this examination, consider the tuberculosis to be completely arrested from the date of failure to report for examination.  Apply the provisions of graduated ratings based upon inactivity from this date.
Note:  Compensation payments are based upon the degree of disability, not on the basis of a Veteran’s willingness to accept treatment. 

 
 3.  Exhibit:  Examples of Ratings for Arrested Tuberculosis
 

Introduction

This exhibit contains examples of ratings for arrested tuberculosis, including
example 1
example 2
example 3, and
example 4.

Change Date

December 29, 2007

V.iii.4.B.3.a.  Example 1

Situation:  A Veteran is 30-percent disabled based upon residuals of far advanced, inactive, pulmonary tuberculosis.  The rating for tuberculosis was in effect on August 19, 1968.  The tuberculosis became active on September 10, 2002. 
Result:  Based upon the reactivation of pulmonary tuberculosis, reinstate the 100-percent evaluation for active tuberculosis and maintain control to ascertain the date of inactivity.
  
Coded Conclusion
 
1. SC (KC PRES)
 
6701
Tuberculosis, pulmonary, chronic, far advanced, active
30% from 08/01/1964
 
100% from 09/10/2002
 


V.iii.4.B.3.b.  Example 2

Situation:  Same facts as in Example 1.  Examination reveals tuberculosis was inactive as of May 10, 2003.
Result:  Continue the 100-percent evaluation for two years after the date of inactivity, followed by graduated reduction to 50 percent thereafter for four years.  Reduce to 30 percent from May 10, 2009, and thereafter based on far advanced lesions.
  
Coded Conclusion
 
1. SC (KC PRES)
 
6701
Tuberculosis, pulmonary, chronic, far advanced, active
30% from 08/01/1964
 
100% from 09/10/2002
 


V.iii.4.B.3.c.  Example 3

Situation:  Same facts as in Example 2.  Medical authorities provide notification of the Veteran’s failure to submit to examination for treatment purposes.  The notice of proposed adverse action advised that payments would be reduced effective June 1, 2004, but the date of last payment at the expiration of the due process period was July 1, 2004.
Result:  Reduce the evaluation for pulmonary tuberculosis to 50 percent effective the date of last payment and to 30 percent four years later. 
 
Coded Conclusion
 
1. SC (KC PRES)
 
6721
Tuberculosis, pulmonary, chronic, far advanced inactive
100% from 05/10/2003
 
50% from 07/01/2004
 
30% from 07/01/2008
 


V.iii.4.B.3.d.  Example 4

Situation:  Same facts as in Example 3.  Medical authorities provide notification the Veteran has reported for examination on March 10, 2005.  The tuberculosis remains inactive.
Result:  Reinstate the 100-percent evaluation and reduce the evaluation to 50 percent two years after the date of inactivity of pulmonary tuberculosis.  Reduce to 30 percent four years later.
Coded Conclusion
 
1. SC (KC PRES)
 
6721
Tuberculosis, pulmonary, chronic, far advanced inactive
100% from 05/10/2003
 
50% from 05/10/2005
 
30% from 05/10/2009

 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 5 - Cardiovascular System Conditions
Article ID: 554400000014520
Updated May 28, 2025

﻿﻿<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1 
Rating Principles for Heart Conditions
2
Evaluating Diseases of the Heart
3
Rating Principles for Hypertension
4
Residuals of Cold Injuries
5
Other Cardiovascular Disabilities


  
 1.  Rating Principles for Heart Conditions
  

Introduction

This topic contains miscellaneous cardiovascular concepts and principles, including
definition of arteriosclerotic heart disease
documentation required to support a diagnosis of arteriosclerotic heart disease
manifestations of advanced arteriosclerotic disease in service
documentation of myocardial infarction (MI)
effective dates and liberalizing changes affecting service connection (SC) for ischemic heart disease (IHD)
considering cardiovascular conditions subsequent to amputation
effects of rheumatic heart disease, and
definition of congenital heart defects.

Change Date

February 5, 2024

V.iii.5.1.a.  Definition:  Arteriosclerotic Heart Disease

Arteriosclerotic heart disease, also diagnosed as ischemic heart disease (IHD) and coronary artery disease (CAD), is a disease of the heart caused by the diminution of blood supply to the heart muscle due to narrowing of the cavity of one or both coronary arteries due to the accumulation of fatty material on the inner lining of the arterial wall.
Note:  IHD refers only to heart disease, and therefore, does not include hypertension or peripheral manifestations of arteriosclerosis such as peripheral vascular disease or stroke.  Consider presumptive service connection (SC) for IHD under 38 CFR 3.309(e).
Reference:  For more information on the definition of IHD, see 
38 CFR 3.309(e), and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 2.B.1.c.

V.iii.5.1.b.  Documentation Required to Support a Diagnosis of Arteriosclerotic Heart Disease

For rating purposes, a diagnosis of arteriosclerotic heart disease must be documented by objective testing.  Objective tests include, but are not limited to
electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) findings
treadmill exercise testing (with or without a thallium scan),or
cardiac catheterization and angiography. 
Note:  The actual test results do not need to be of record if the evidence indicates that the diagnosis was rendered by a competent medical professional and based on the results of an objective test.
 
Important:  Symptoms of chest pain alone are not sufficient to support a clinical diagnosis of arteriosclerotic heart disease for rating purposes.  As chest pain is a symptom of multiple disabilities, the diagnosis of arteriosclerotic heart disease mustbe supported with objective documentation.

V.iii.5.1.c.  Manifestations of Advanced Arteriosclerotic Disease in Service

When SC for a cardiovascular condition is claimed, the mere identification of arteriosclerotic disease upon routine examination early in service is not a basis for SC.
 
Manifestation of lesions or symptoms of chronic disease will establish pre-service existence under 38 CFR 3.303(c) if objective evidence shows manifestation
from date of enlistment, or
so close to enlistment that chronic disease could not have originated during service. 
Important:
An analysis of the presumption of soundness under 38 CFR 3.304 and the provisions on aggravation under 38 CFR 3.306 may be required.
Grant SC for any sudden development during service of coronary occlusion or thrombosis whether or not these are manifestations of advanced long-standing arteriosclerotic disease. 
Note:  Under 38 CFR 3.6(a), inactive duty for training qualifies as active service if an individual becomes disabled or dies from an acute myocardial infarction (MI), a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident occurring during such training.

V.iii.5.1.d.  Documentation of MI

38 CFR 4.104, diagnostic code (DC) 7006 requires documentation of an MI by laboratory tests.  Health providers may rely on a variety of diagnostic tests to document MI.  
Testing may include, but is not limited to,
EKG
cardiac enzymes (Troponin, CKMB), and
radionuclide imaging. 
The Heart Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) elicits information about testing conducted in support of cardiac workup. 
If an assessment of an MI appears to have been made without diagnostic testing or if there is a question about whether the assessment was supported by appropriate testing, obtain clarification from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) examiner or other provider. 
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating medical evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.3.

V.iii.5.1.e.  Effective Dates and Liberalizing Changes Affecting SC for IHD

IHD became a condition presumptively associated with herbicide exposure effective August 31, 2010.  This was a liberalizing change of law.
 
Therefore, unless an earlier effective date is available under the provisions of 38 CFR 3.816, consider the application of 38 CFR 3.114(a) when granting presumptive SC for IHD related to herbicide exposure under the provisions of 38 CFR 3.307(a)(6) and 38 CFR 3.309(e).
 
References:  For more information on
the addition of presumptive conditions under the provisions of 38 CFR 3.309(e), see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.B.1.i
the definition of IHD, see 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.1.a, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 2.B.1.c, and
effective dates associated with liberalizing changes of law, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.

V.iii.5.1.f.  Considering Cardiovascular Conditions Subsequent to Amputation

Grant SC on a secondary basis for the following conditions that develop subsequent to the service-connected (SC) amputation of one lower extremity at or above the knee, or SC amputations of both lower extremities at or above the ankles:
IHD, or
other cardiovascular disease, including hypertension. 
References:  For more information on
proximate results or secondary conditions, see 38 CFR 3.310(b)
secondary SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.D, and
assignment of effective dates for secondary SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.3.f.

V.iii.5.1.g.  Effects of Rheumatic Heart Disease

Chronic rheumatic heart disease results from single or repeated attacks of rheumatic fever that produce valvular disease, manifested by
rigidity and deformity of the cusps
fusion of the commissures, or
shortening and fusion of the chordae tendineae. 
The earliest evidence of organic valvular disease is
a significant murmur, and
hemodynamically significant valvular lesions found on x-ray, fluoroscopy, and ECG study, since these reveal the earliest stages of specific chamber enlargement. 
Note:  Grant SC for an aortic valve insufficiency that manifests without other cause after an in-service case of rheumatic fever.

V.iii.5.1.h.  Definition:  Congenital Heart Defects

Congenital heart defects include common heart conditions due to prenatal influences, such as
patent foramen ovale
patent ductus arteriosus
coarctation of the aorta, and
intraventricular septal defect.

  
 2.  Evaluating Diseases of the Heart

Introduction

This topic contains information about applying the evaluation criteria for diseases of the heart, including
evaluating heart disease using metabolic equivalents (METs)
impact of non-service-connected (NSC) conditions on the evaluation of METs
aspirin as continuous medication
evaluation of nephritis and cardiovascular disabilities
evaluating arrhythmias, and
considering co-existing heart conditions and arrhythmia.

Change Date

November 15, 2021

V.iii.5.2.a.  Evaluating Heart Disease Using METs

The General Rating Formula (GRF) for Diseases of the Heart relies on the measured or estimated workload capacity of the heart using metabolic equivalents (METs) at which symptoms of heart failure occur for the assignment of disability evaluations.
When METs cannot be obtained through exercise testing for medical reasons, the examiner may provide an estimation of the METs.
 
Important:  The examiner must state that the estimated METs are due solely to an SC cardiovascular disability.
References:  For more information on
the definition of MET, see Note 2 of the GRF for Diseases of the Heart at 38 CFR 4.104
symptoms of heart failure, see Note 3 of the GRF for Diseases of the Heart at 38 CFR 4.104
provisions for the application of the general rating formula for diseases of the heart, see 38 CFR 4.100, and
the historical use of congestive heart failure and ejection fraction when evaluating diseases of the heart, see
historical 38 CFR 4.104 in effect prior to November 14, 2021, and
the attachment Historical_M21-1V_iii_5_9-15-21.  

V.iii.5.2.b.  Impact of NSC Conditions on the Evaluation of METs 

Non-service-connected (NSC) disabilities, such as a chronic respiratory condition or morbid obesity, may have an impact on METs results.
 
When an examiner cannot determine METs attributable to an SC cardiovascular disability due to the effects of NSC conditions and provides a sufficient rationale detailing why the determination cannot be provided, follow the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.c.

V.iii.5.2.c.  Aspirin as Continuous Medication

Aspirin is a medication that may be medically recommended for control of a cardiovascular disability such as an ischemic stroke, angina, or coronary artery bypass graft.  
 
When considering a compensable evaluation based on need for continuous medication as provided in 38 CFR 4.100(a) and the GRF for evaluating diseases of the heart as provided in 38 CFR 4.104 for the 10-percent evaluation, aspirin treatment must be medically required for care of the SC cardiovascular disorder.  
A medical professional must have advised the claimant to use aspirin to reduce disability from the SC cardiovascular disorder or to prevent additional disability from that disorder. 
A formal prescription to obtain the medication from a pharmacy is not required given that aspirin is an over-the-counter medication.
Self-directed or voluntary use of aspirin by a claimant who is a layperson will not be accepted as competently proving that aspirin treatment is medically necessary for treatment of the SC cardiovascular disorder. 
To satisfy the requirement of “continuous” medication the evidence must show an ongoing regimen – not periodic, irregular use.
 
Take care not to incorrectly conclude that an aspirin treatment regimen is necessary simply because aspirin appears on a current medication list.  A medication list may not contain enough information to conclude:
whether aspirin was medically recommended or self-prescribed
whether aspirin is being used for the SC cardiovascular condition or another disability, and/or
how frequently aspirin is being taken. 

V.iii.5.2.d.  Evaluation of Nephritis and Cardiovascular Disabilities

38 CFR 4.115 states that separate ratings cannot be assigned for disability from disease of the heart and any form of nephritis. 
 
Reference:  For more information on the limits on separate evaluation of nephritis and cardiovascular conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.2.g.

V.iii.5.2.e.  Evaluating Arrhythmias

The impairment and disability resulting from one or more types of arrhythmia, evaluated under 38 CFR 4.104, DCs 7009-7011 and 7015, are essentially indistinguishable.  Consequently, assignment of multiple evaluations under any of these DCs would be in violation of 38 CFR 4.14.  
 
Assign a single evaluation under the DC which reflects the predominant disability picture for the arrhythmia(s) in question.  

V.iii.5.2.f.  Considering Co-Existing Heart Conditions andArrhythmia

When questions arise as to whether a single or separate evaluations may be assigned for co-existing cardiovascular disabilities, such as arrhythmias and other cardiovascular diseases, consider whether the criteria for evaluating the disability and/or the symptoms of the disability are separate and distinct and apply 38 CFR 4.14 and any other condition-specific guidance.
 
When the evaluation criteria are separate and distinct, the symptoms do not overlap, and no specific prohibition applies, separate evaluations are warranted. 

  
3.  Rating Principles for Hypertension﻿﻿﻿
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on concepts and principles relating to hypertension, including
definitions of hypertension and isolated systolic hypertension
blood pressure readings required for SC of hypertension﻿
confirmation with multiple blood pressure readings
pre-hypertension
predominant blood pressure in evaluations of hypertension
long term effects of hypertension
granting SC for arteriosclerotic manifestations due to hypertension
effective dates of arteriosclerotic manifestations granted secondary to hypertension
separately evaluating hypertension and heart disease
prohibition on separate evaluation of hypertension and renal dysfunction from nephritis, and
evaluating rheumatic heart disease coexisting with hypertensive or arteriosclerotic heart disease.

Change Date

February 5, 2024

V.iii.5.3.a.  Definitions: Hypertension and Isolated Systolic Hypertension

Two types of hypertensive vascular disease are defined in 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101, Note 1.
 
Hypertension means elevated diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm or greater. 
 
Isolated systolic hypertension means that systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160mm or greater with a diastolic blood pressure of less than 90mm.
 
Note:  Use of the term “hypertension” in reports or in VA guidance will most often be used as a synonym for any type of hypertensive vascular disease. 

V.iii.5.3.b.  Blood Pressure Readings Required for SC of Hypertension

Subject to the exception below, SC for hypertensive vascular disease requires current blood pressure readings (obtained during the claim period) which meet the regulatory definition of either
hypertension, or
isolated systolic hypertension. 
Exception:  Current readings meeting the regulatory standards for the definitions above are not required if
the competent evidence shows a diagnosis of hypertension or isolated systolic hypertension, currently controlled by (or asymptomatic with) medication, and
a past competent diagnosis was made
in service
based on manifestation of blood pressure readings to a compensable degree within the presumptive period as provided in 38 CFR 3.307 and 38 CFR 3.309(a), or
secondary to an SC disability.  
Notes:  
When SC is established based on the exception above (where current readings do not meet the regulatory definitions), the disability percentage will be either 0 percent or 10 percent, depending on whether or not the predominant diastolic pressure was 100 or more before symptoms were controlled with medication as provided in 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101.
A disability first clearly diagnosed after service can be SC under 38 CFR 3.303(d) when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service
 Reference:  For more information on
the concept of competent evidence and policies on evaluating the competency of evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.

V.iii.5.3.c.  Confirmation With Multiple Blood Pressure Readings

In addition to the definitional requirements for a diagnosis of hypertension or isolated systolic hypertension 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101  provides a second criterion that must be met for a diagnosis to be acceptable.
 
Subject to the exceptions below, a diagnosis of hypertension (or isolated systolic hypertension) must be confirmed by blood pressure readings taken two or more times on at least three different days.
 
The rulemaking for the regulation stated that the purpose of this requirement, was to “assure that the existence of hypertension is not conceded based solely on readings taken on a single, perhaps unrepresentative, day.”
 
Exceptions: 
In a claim for reevaluation of SC hypertension, readings on multiple days are not required.  The policy, reflected in the Hypertension Disability Benefits Questionnaire, is that where hypertension has been previously diagnosed, the examiner is only required to take three blood pressure readings on the day of examination. 
Similarly, multiple confirmatory readings are not required when there is a past diagnosis with hypertensive vascular disease currently controlled on medication as provided in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.3.b. 
Note 1 in 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101 does not require that a diagnosis of either type of hypertensive vascular disease in service treatment records (STRs) has been confirmed by readings taken two or more times on each of three different days for the purposes of in-service incurrence.  
Important:  The decision maker must critically evaluate the evidence to ensure the in-service diagnosis was based on blood pressure readings in accordance with 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101 and M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5.3.b in claims for SC for hypertension where
hypertension is currently diagnosed, and
controlled with medication. 
If the evidence is unclear, medical clarification and/or a medical opinion may be warranted.
 
References:  For more information on
evaluating evidence and making a decision, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A, and
requesting medical examinations and medical opinions, see 
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A, and 
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A. 

V.iii.5.3.d.  Pre-Hypertension

Pre-hypertension is generally defined as systolic pressure between 120mm and 139mm and diastolic pressure from 80mm to 89mm.
 
Pre-hypertension is not a disability for VA purposes.
 
If the VA examination (or evidence used in lieu of a VA examination) contains only a diagnosis of pre-hypertension based on readings that do not meet the definition of hypertension or isolated systolic hypertension, do not
seek clarification, or
grant SC for hypertension based on the diagnosis.   
Exception:  Clarification may be required if a current diagnosis of “pre-hypertension” is made where readings exist in the record that meet the regulatory definition of hypertension.  This may indicate
conflicting evidence, and/or
equivocation by the medical professional on diagnosis or chronicity (particularly if, for example, the facts show a predominance of readings not meeting the regulatory definition of hypertension).  
References:  For more information on
evaluating medical evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.3
developing for additional evidence when needed, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.B.1.a, and
handling examination reports insufficient for rating purposes, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C.

V.iii.5.3.e.  Predominant Blood Pressure in Evaluations of Hypertension

Every level of evaluation specified under 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101 requires consideration of the predominant (most common or prevailing) blood pressure. Blood pressure may fluctuate depending on a number of variables and disability evaluations must be based on valid evidence demonstrating representative disability.  
 
Generally the regulation requires analysis of predominant current readings— readings from the period during which an effective date can be assigned.
 
When current predominant blood pressure readings are non-compensable, a 10-percent evaluation may be assigned if
continuous medication is required for blood pressure control, and
past diastolic pressure (before medication was prescribed) was predominantly 100 or greater. 
Important:  Do not assign a 10-percent evaluation based upon a showing of one of the two conjunctive criteria above by invoking the benefit of the doubt rule (38 CFR 3.102 and 38 CFR 4.3 or 38 CFR 4.7).  When either criterion is simply not shown (for example, the claimant is using prescribed anti-hypertensive medication but diastolic pressure has never been predominantly 100 or greater) the evidence is not in relative equipoise on whether a 10-percent evaluation is appropriate and the disability picture does not more nearly approximate the 10-percent criteria.  
 
However, 38 CFR 3.102, 38 CFR 4.3, and 38 CFR 4.7 may be applicable to whether the evidence supports each criterion, namely
whether diastolic readings before were predominantly 100 or higher or
whether continuous medication is required for control of blood pressure.
Use the table below to assist in analyzing predominant blood pressure.
 
When ...
Then ...
determining which diastolic or systolic pressure range is predominant
make note of the competent and credible evidence of diastolic and systolic readings (see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A)
determine which readings correspond with the various levels of evaluation specified in the diagnostic criteria (for example diastolic readings “100 or more” or “110 or more”), and
subject to the notes below, conclude that the range with the most qualifying readings is the predominant blood pressure.  
Notes: 
If there is a relative balance of readings supporting two levels of evaluation for the same time frame, apply 38 CFR 3.102, 38 CFR 4.3 and 38 CFR 4.7. 
Example:  If there are six diastolic measurements from one doctor in the 100 to 109 range (108, 106, 108, 104, 106, 100) in June, and six diastolic readings from another doctor in the 110 to 119 range (110, 110, 114, 110, 112, 110) the same month, give the benefit of the doubt and assign the higher 20-percent evaluation. 
If during the evaluation period more than one blood pressure range is supported for at least a month stage the evaluation in accordance with the facts. 
Example:  Use the readings above but assume second doctor’s readings were taken in November. Assign a 10-percent evaluation based on the June results from the date of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is the later; stage to 20 percent as of the date of the first readings from November.
considering predominant blood pressure before control with medication
start with the more current of
the readings taken as part of the diagnostic workup period leading to the diagnosis of hypertension if medication was prescribed at that time, or
the readings taken as part of a subsequent diagnostic workup period leading to the prescription of medication.  
Explanation:  These are the readings pertinent to whether hypertensive readings were predominantly in the compensable range before hypertension was brought under control with medication. 
 
Do not consider 
normal blood pressure readings taken long before the diagnosis of hypertensive vascular disease was made, or
minimally hypertensive readings prior to active medical surveillance or observation leading to the prescription of medication. 
Explanation:  These are not pertinent and will impermissibly skew the analysis of the predominant blood pressure.
considering a history of predominant blood pressure for the purposes of a 10 percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101
only consider blood pressure readings obtained when the Veteran was undergoing a diagnostic evaluation for hypertension, and
do not consider other clinical records documenting treatment prior to the diagnostic evaluation for hypertension.
 

V.iii.5.3.f.  Long Term Effects of Hypertension

Hypertension may
exist for years without causing symptoms
so increase the cardiac load as to result in hypertrophy of the cardiac muscle or cardiac dilation and decompensation, if sufficiently severe, and
cause arteriosclerosis of uneven distribution that often involves the vessels of one organ to a greater degree than those of the rest of the body, in cases where hypertension is long-standing. 
If the hypertension is of sufficient degree to cause significant impairment of circulation to the organ, symptoms will manifest in accordance with the
organ involved, and
degree of impairment.

V.iii.5.3.g.  Granting SC for Arteriosclerotic Manifestations Due to Hypertension

If additional arteriosclerotic manifestations are subsequently diagnosed in a Veteran with SC hypertension, grant SC on a secondary basis through the relationship to hypertension for any of the following:
cerebral arteriosclerosis or thrombosis with hemiplegia
nephrosclerosis of the kidneys with impairment of renal function, or
myocardial damage or coronary occlusion of the heart. 
Important:  A claim for benefits is required to adjudicate a secondary SC claim for any of the arteriosclerotic manifestations.
 
Notes: 
Address SC for the above-listed cardiovascular conditions through the relationship to the hypertension when a sympathetic reading of the Veteran’s claim reasonably implies a claim for SC for those conditions.
Arteriosclerosis occurs with advancing age without preexisting hypertension, and may occur in some younger individuals who are predisposed to arterial changes.
The existence of arteriosclerosis does not imply/indicate prior hypertension.
References:  For more information on 
secondary SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.D, and
sympathetic reading and scope of claim, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.

V.iii.5.3.h.  Effective Dates of Arteriosclerotic Manifestations Granted Secondary to Hypertension

The effective date of any grant of SC for arteriosclerotic manifestations secondary to hypertension is the date of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.
 
Important:  
Arteriosclerotic manifestations are not considered a worsening of hypertensive vascular disease (hypertension and isolated systolic hypertension) rated under 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101.  They are separate conditions which may be secondary to hypertensive vascular disease, but which nonetheless must be evaluated under rating criteria specific to their symptomology and the functions and anatomical localities they affect.  Therefore, do not apply 38 CFR 3.400(o)(2) to allow an effective date prior to the date of claim, as this only applies to increases.
If awarding SC for a disability as within scope of the hypertension claim, apply an effective date based on the date of claim for hypertension.
References:  For more information on
scope of claim, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A
secondary SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.D, and
effective dates, see 
38 CFR 3.400, and 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.

V.iii.5.3.i.  SeparatelyEvaluating Hypertension and Heart Disease

Evaluate hypertension separately from hypertensive heart disease and other types of heart disease. 
 
Evaluate hypertension due to aortic insufficiency, which is usually the isolated systolic type, as part of the condition causing it rather than by a separate evaluation.
 
Notes: 
The cause of hypertension is unknown in the vast majority of cases.
Do not establish SC for hypertension if the evidence does not contain blood pressure readings as specified in 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7101, Note 1. 

V.iii.5.3.j.  Prohibition on Separate Evaluation of Hypertension  and Renal Dysfunction from Nephritis

38 CFR 4.115 prohibits assignment of separate evaluations for renal dysfunction from nephritis and for hypertension except where
the sole renal disability is absence of a kidney (even if that was due to nephritis), or
nephritis has progressed to the point where regular dialysis is required.
References:  For more information on
pyramiding of evaluations for nephritis and hypertension, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.2.c
assignment of separate evaluations for nephropathy and hypertension, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.2.g, and
separating findings that constitute a single disability and the 38 CFR 4.14prohibition against pyramiding, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b.

V.iii.5.3.k.  Evaluating Rheumatic Heart Disease Coexisting With Hypertensive or Arteriosclerotic Heart Disease

Accepted medical principles do not concede an etiological relationship between rheumatic heart disease and either hypertensive or arteriosclerotic heart disease.  Therefore, do not extend secondary SC to systemic manifestations or arteriosclerosis in areas remote from the heart if the Veteran is SC for rheumatic heart disease.
 
If a Veteran who is SC for rheumatic heart disease develops hypertensive or arteriosclerotic heart disease after the applicable presumptive period following military discharge, request a medical opinion to determine which condition is causing the current signs and symptoms.
 
Note:  If the examiner is unable to separate the effects of one type of heart disease from another, follow the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.c.

 
4.  Residuals of Cold Injuries
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about residuals of cold injury, including
general effects of injury due to cold
long-term effects of exposure to cold
granting SC for residuals of cold injuries
x-ray findings in cold injury cases
considering 
circumstances of service in cold injury cases, and
cold injuries incurred during the Chosin Reservoir Campaign, and
granting SC for cold injuries incurred during the Chosin Reservoir Campaign.

Change Date

November 15, 2021

V.iii.5.4.a.  General Effects of Injury Due to Cold

Injury due to exposure to extremely cold temperatures causes structural and functional disturbances of
small blood vessels
cells
nerves
skin, and
bone.  
The physical effects of exposure may be acute or chronic, with immediate or latent manifestations. 
 
Examples:  Exposure to
damp cold temperatures (around freezing) cause frostnip and immersion or trench foot.
dry cold, or temperatures well below freezing, cause frostbite with, in severe cases, loss of body parts, such as fingers, toes, earlobes, or the tip of the nose.

V.iii.5.4.b.  Long-Term Effects of Exposure to Cold

The fact that the immediate effects of cold injury may have been characterized as “acute” or “healed” does not preclude development of disability at the original site of injury many years later.
 
There does not need to be continuity of symptoms following a cold injury.  Typically symptoms may last for days up to a week or two after the cold injury.  Unless there was a loss (such as part of a hand or foot), the initial injury is followed by a long symptom-free period, after which signs and symptoms may reoccur. 
 
An SC cold injury is, therefore, evaluated based on those residuals identified in 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7122.

V.iii.5.4.c.  Granting SC for Residuals of Cold Injuries

Grant SC for the residuals of cold injury if
the cold injury was incurred during military service, and
an intercurrent NSC cause cannot be determined.  
Notes: 
The fact that an NSC systemic disease that could produce similar findings is present, or that other areas of the body not affected by cold injury have similar findings, does not necessarily preclude SC for residual conditions in the cold-injured areas. 
When considering the possibility of intercurrent cause, always resolve reasonable doubt in the Veteran’s favor. 
Reference:  For more information on reasonable doubt, see 38 CFR 3.102.

V.iii.5.4.d.  X-Ray Findings in Cold Injury Cases 

For appropriate evaluation of cold injuries under the criteria of 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7122, it is very important that there be medical evidence addressing whether or not x-ray abnormalities (specifically osteoporosis, subarticular punched out lesions, or osteoarthritis) exist.
 
The Cold Injury Residuals Disability Benefits Questionnaire instructs that the x-ray abnormalities (osteoporosis, subarticular punched out lesions, or osteoarthritis) must be confirmed by x-rays.  Once these abnormalities have been documented no further imaging studies are indicated.  This means that x-ray studies do not have to be completed on each and every subsequent examination after the specified abnormalities have been documented. 
 
The DBQ asks the examiner whether x-rays have been performed and if so to provide the date of the studies. 
 
If an examination is necessary for evaluation purposes, x-ray studies were not performed as part of the examination, and the specified x-ray abnormalities have not been previously documented, return the examination.
 
References:  For more information on
examination report requirements, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A, and
handling examinations insufficient for rating purposes, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C. 

V.iii.5.4.e.  Considering Circumstances of Service in Cold Injury Cases

Consider the circumstances of service as provided in 38 U.S.C. 1154(a) and 38 CFR 3.303(a), even if STRs are not positive for a claimed cold injury.   
 
Also as provided in 38 U.S.C. 1154(b) and 38 CFR 3.304(d), in cases involving cold injuries related to documented combat service, satisfactory lay evidence of service conditions will be accepted if consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of combat service even if there is no official documentation in service records.
 
For example, the Battle of the Bulge (Ardennes/Rhineland) in the winter of 1944/1945 during World War II was known for its extreme cold.  If participation in the Battle of the Bulge is confirmed by the DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty, or personnel records, concede exposure to extreme cold.  If the Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the circumstances of service are consistent with claimed service in the Battle of the Bulge, concede exposure to extreme cold.
 
Afford an examination if the circumstances are consistent with exposure to extreme cold, proving an event in service, and the criteria for a necessary examination are otherwise met. 
 
Reference:  For more information on determining whether an examination is necessary, see
38 CFR 3.159(c)(4), and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A and B.

V.iii.5.4.f.  Considering Cold Injuries Incurred During the Chosin Reservoir Campaign

The Chosin Reservoir Campaign was conducted during the Korean War, October 1950 through December 1950, in temperatures of –20ºF or lower.  Many participants in this campaign suffered from frostbite for which they received no treatment and, as a result, there may be no STRs to directly support their claims for frostbite. 
 
If the Veteran’s participation in the Chosin Reservoir Campaign is confirmed, concede exposure to extreme cold under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. 1154(a).

V.iii.5.4.g.  Granting SC for Cold Injuries Incurred During the Chosin Reservoir Campaign

Grant SC under the provisions of 38 CFR 3.303(a) and 38 CFR 3.304(d) if
the Veteran has a disability which is diagnosed as a residual of cold injury, and
there are no other circumstances to which this disability may be attributed.

5.  Other Cardiovascular Disabilities

Introduction

This topic contains information about other cardiovascular disabilities, including
evaluating Raynaud’s syndrome and Raynaud’s disease
testing requirements for peripheral arterial disease, and
changes in the rating schedule for the cardiovascular system. 

Change Date

February 5, 2024

V.iii.5.5.a. Evaluating Raynaud’s Syndrome and Raynaud’s Disease

Raynaud’s syndrome and Raynaud’s disease are unrelated in etiology and severity.  Raynaud’s disease is more common and tends to be less severe than Raynaud’s syndrome. 
Raynaud’s syndrome (also known as secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon) is typically caused by autoimmune diseases such as scleroderma, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, atherosclerosis, or polycythemia.  This condition is rated under 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7117.
Raynaud’s disease (also known as primary Raynaud’s phenomenon) is idiopathic (due to an unknown cause).  This condition is rated under 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7124.
Note:  A Veteran cannot receive simultaneous ratings under both 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7117 and DC 7124 because Raynaud’s disease and Raynaud’s syndrome cannot be comorbid conditions. 

V.iii.5.5.b.  Testing Requirements for Peripheral Arterial Disease

Under 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7114, Note 2, peripheral arterial disease may be evaluated utilizing ankle brachial index, ankle pressure, toe pressure, or transcutaneous oxygen tension values. 
 
The ankle/brachial index is the most common type of testing for evaluating peripheral arterial disease.  In some situations, ankle/brachial index measurement is not appropriate for a given disability.  In those cases, ankle pressure, toe pressure, or transcutaneous oxygen tension values are more appropriate tests.
If the ankle pressure, toe pressure, and/or transcutaneous oxygen tension measurements are not of record, evaluate based on the ankle/brachial index unless the examiner indicates that one of the other tests is necessary.
If more than one test result is available, evaluate using the test result that results in the highest evaluation.  

V.iii.5.5.c.  Changes in the Rating Schedule for the Cardiovascular System

The rating criteria for cardiovascular conditions have undergone historical changes.  Recent full-scale historical revisions were effective on the following dates:
November 14, 2021, and
January 12, 1998.
Notes: 
These changes in the rating criteria
are not considered liberalizing, and
should not be the basis for a reduction in disability rating unless medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved. 
A regulatory change to 38 CFR 4.104, DC 7122 effective August 13, 1998, further revised, but did not substantively change, the evaluation criteria of long-term effects of cold injury residuals.
References:  For more information on 
revised rating schedule criteria and effective dates, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6, and
evaluating disabilities following rating schedule readjustment, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2. 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 6 - Digestive Disabilities
Article ID: 554400000014523
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1 
Assigning Evaluations for Digestive Disabilities
2
Service Connection (SC) Considerations Involving Digestive Disabilities
3
SC and Evaluation Considerations Involving Hepatitis


        
1.  Assigning Evaluations for Digestive Disabilities
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about assigning evaluations for digestive disabilities, including
regulatory framework for assigning evaluations for digestive disabilities
prohibition of separate evaluations for certain coexisting digestive disabilities
evaluating coexisting digestive disabilities that cannot be separately evaluated
example of evaluating coexisting digestive disabilities, and
changes to the rating schedule for the digestive system.

Change Date

May 20, 2024

V.iii.6.1.a.  Regulatory Framework for Assigning Evaluations for Digestive Disabilities

Disabilities of the digestive system are rated using
38 CFR 4.112 (weight loss and nutrition)
38 CFR 4.113 (coexisting abdominal conditions), and
38 CFR 4.114 (the schedule of ratings for the digestive system).
38 CFR 4.112 defines terms used in diagnostic criteria in 38 CFR 4.114 that involve weight and nutrition. 
38 CFR 4.113 provides a general warning that certain coexisting digestive conditions (those listed in the prefatory instruction in 38 CFR 4.114) cannot be separately evaluated without pyramiding. 
38 CFR 4.114 contains diagnostic codes (DCs) and associated criteria for disabilities of the digestive system.  It also contains a general principle that certain listed DCs cannot be separately evaluated and combined.  

V.iii.6.1.b.  Prohibition of Separate Evaluations for Certain Coexisting Digestive Disabilities

38 CFR 4.114 prohibits assigning separate evaluations for certain coexisting digestive disabilities.  The purpose of the prohibition, as is further explained in 38 CFR 4.113 and 38 CFR 4.14, is so that digestive disabilities, particularly within the abdomen, with closely related overlapping manifestations will not be combined under 38 CFR 4.25, resulting in extra compensation for the same disability or facet of disability.
Assignment of separate evaluations for any combination of the following DCs is prohibited: 
7301 through 7329
7331
7342
7345 through 7350
7352, and
7355 through 7357.
Exceptions:  Effective May 19, 2024, 38 CFR 4.114 does not categorically prohibit evaluating hiatal hernia separately from another condition in the above list, as long as the specific evaluations do not pyramid under 38 CFR 4.14.  This is because as of that date, hiatal hernia (38 CFR 4.114, DC 7346) is evaluated using the diagnostic criteria for esophageal stricture (38 CFR 4.114, DC 7203), which is not included in the listed DCs.    
Additionally, some DCs provide instructions to rate residuals not addressed in the diagnostic criteria under another DC.  38 CFR 4.114, DC 7319 (irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)) contains a note that says, “Evaluate other symptoms of a functional digestive disorder, not encompassed by this diagnostic code, under the appropriate diagnostic code, to include gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome (DC 7356), following the general principles of § 4.14 and this section.”  
When the primary DC for the diagnosis, and a DC for rating other residuals not encompassed in the primary DC are both listed in 38 CFR 4.114, the evaluations can be combined on a case-by-case basis as long as the symptoms used to provide each evaluation do not pyramid under 38 CFR 4.14.  
Important:
Where disabilities that fall within the range of DCs above cannot be separately evaluated and included in a combined evaluation, a single evaluation will be assigned as provided in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.1.c.  As explained in that block, elevation of the evaluation may be appropriate.
When separately evaluating and combining DCs is prohibited under 38 CFR 4.114, the Codesheet must still reflect each service-connected (SC) disability.  
Notes:
Separately evaluating and combining 7200-series DCs (such as Barrett’s esophagus) with a 7300-series DC (such as IBS or Crohn’s disease) is not categorically prohibited by 38 CFR 4.114. 
Similarly, separately evaluating and combining multiple 7200-series DCs is not categorically prohibited. 
Whenever considering DCs that are not included in the 38 CFR 4.114 list above, always carefully consider whether specific diagnostic criteria will compensate the same facet of disability and therefore violate 38 CFR 4.14.

V.iii.6.1.c.  Evaluating Coexisting Digestive Disabilities That Cannot Be Separately Evaluated

Under 38 CFR 4.113 and 38 CFR 4.114 when there are coexisting digestive disabilities for which multiple evaluations cannot be assigned
a single rating will be assigned under the DC which reflects the predominant disability, and
that evaluation will be elevated to the next higher evaluation when the severity of the overall disability warrants it.
The Veterans Benefits Management System – Rating (VBMS-R) Evaluation Builder is programmed to appropriately apply the provisions of 38 CFR 4.114 but it is critical that
the user input the symptoms that support the elevation, and
the symptoms coincide with the criteria listed in the rating schedule.
For instructions on proper application of the 38 CFR 4.114 provision on assigning an evaluation in cases of multiple qualifying coexisting digestive disabilities see the table below.
Step
Action
1
Determine which of the coexisting digestive conditions is the predominant disability. 
 
Important: 
To determine the predominant disability, determine the evaluation each condition would support on its own.  The condition that has the highest disability evaluation is the predominant disability.
If the same evaluation would be assigned to each, go through the analysis in the steps, alternatively treating each condition as the predominant one to see if one alternative provides a more advantageous outcome to the Veteran. 
2
Determine if there are symptoms of the non-predominant disability that do not overlap with those of the predominant disability.
If yes, go to Step 3.
If no, go to Step 4.
3
Reevaluate the predominant disability but this time also consider the non-overlapping symptoms of the non-predominant disability. 
 
Important:  The non-overlapping symptoms must support a higher evaluation when applied to the DC criteria being utilized for the predominant disability. 
 
Determine if the resultant evaluation is higher than the evaluation for the symptoms of the predominant disability alone (as derived in Step 1).
If yes, go to Step 5.
If no, go to Step 4.
4
Rate the coexistent disabilities together under the rating criteria for the predominant disability without elevation to the next higher evaluation.
No further action necessary. 
5
Rate the coexistent disabilities together under the rating criteria for the predominant disability and elevate to the next higher evaluation.
No further action necessary. 
Important:  The “next higher level of evaluation” is the lowest evaluation specified in the DC for the predominant disability that provides greater compensation than the evaluation derived in Step 1 (the evaluation that would be supported by only the symptoms of the predominant disability without the symptoms of the lesser disability).  Do not simply add 10 percent.

V.iii.6.1.d.  Example:  Evaluating Coexisting Digestive Disabilities

Situation:  A Veteran has two coexisting digestive disabilities:
peptic ulcer disease meeting the criteria for a 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7304 (two episodes of abdominal pain lasting for three consecutive days in duration in the past 12 months managed by daily prescribed medication), and
ulcerative colitis of the large bowel, meeting the criteria for a 30-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7323, which is evaluated using the criteria for Crohn’s disease or undifferentiated inflammatory bowel disease in 38 CFR 3.114, DC 7326 (mild disease managed with oral and topical agents other than immunosuppressants or other biologic agents, and characterized by recurrent abdominal pain with 3 or fewer daily episodes of diarrhea and minimal signs of toxicity including infrequent low grade fever). 
Result:  Separate evaluations for the peptic ulcer disease and ulcerative colitis are not permitted under 38 CFR 4.114.  A single 30-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7323 would be assigned. 
Explanation:  Ulcerative colitis represents the predominant disability picture as it supports the higher evaluation on its own.    
There are no non-overlapping symptoms of peptic ulcer disease to establish any of the criteria supporting the next higher 60-percent evaluation for ulcerative colitis:  moderate inflammatory bowel disease that is managed on an outpatient basis with immunosuppressants or other biologic agents; and is characterized by recurrent abdominal pain, four to five daily episodes of diarrhea; and intermittent signs of toxicity such as fever, tachycardia, or anemia.  Therefore, the coexistent disabilities must be rated together under the rating criteria for the predominant disability without elevation to the next higher 60-percent evaluation.
Situation:  A Veteran has two coexisting digestive conditions:
IBS, meeting the criteria for a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7319 (abdominal pain related to defecation at least once during the previous three months; and two or more of the following: (1) change in stool frequency, (2) change in stool form, (3) altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency), (4) mucorrhea, (5) abdominal bloating, or (6) subjective distension), and
hiatal hernia, meeting the criteria for a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7346, which is rated as stricture of the esophagus under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7203 (documented history of esophageal stricture(s) that requires daily medications to control dysphagia otherwise asymptomatic).
Result:  Effective May 19, 2024, separate evaluations for IBS and hiatal hernia are permitted under 38 CFR 4.114.    
Explanation:  Even though the DCs for hiatal hernia (7346) and IBS (7319) each fall within the range of DCs that the regulation says will not be separately evaluated and combined, they fall within the exception discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.1.b because effective May 19, 2024, 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7346 is evaluated using the criteria in 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7203 (stricture of the esophagus).  The 10-percent criteria for the two DCs do not overlap.  They do not compensate for the same disability or facet of disability, which is prohibited under 38 CFR 4.14.  Note that under historical criteria, these DCs could not be separately evaluated and combined without pyramiding.  

V.iii.6.1.e.  Changes to the Rating Schedule for the Digestive System

The schedule of ratings – digestive system, 38 CFR 4.114, was amended effective May 19, 2024.  The final rule added and deleted DCs, and extensively changed diagnostic criteria.  The final rule also deleted regulations with obsolete or redundant guidance on ulcers (38 CFR 4.110) and post-gastrectomy syndrome (38 CFR 4.111).  
The purpose of the digestive system updates was to ensure that the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and to provide updated more objective evaluation criteria.  The changes were not intended as a liberalization.
When evaluating a claim involving evaluation of a digestive disability that was pending on May 19, 2024, apply the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.pon applicability of revised rating schedule criteria.
Important:  In some instances, a digestive disorder may have been evaluated under analogous DC – whether using formal conventions for rating by analogy or not.  For example, prior to the current changes, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) did not have its own DC.  The recommended DC for GERD in the past was 7346 (hiatal hernia).  It might appear on the Codesheet as “7399-7346” or just “7346.”  Now the DC is 7206. 
Where a condition was previously rated by analogy but now has a specific DC, update the DC, but when considering the appropriate current evaluation, apply 38 CFR 3.951(a).  Do not reduce the evaluation solely based on the changed criteria.  The evaluation can only be reduced when medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved.  Note that in the case of hiatal hernia and GERD, although the latter condition has its own DC the criteria for evaluating the two conditions is the same.  Hiatal hernia is rated as stricture of the esophagus (38 CFR 4.114, DC 7203), which uses identical criteria to those in 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7206.
Reference:  For more information on protection and rating schedule changes, and reviewing evaluations after a rating schedule change, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.4.

  
2.  SC Considerations Involving Digestive Disabilities
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about SC considerations involving digestive disabilities, including
considering circumstances of service when determining SC for gastrointestinal disorders
testing not required for SC for GERD
establishing SC for inguinal hernia
SC and recurrence of hemorrhoids
example of analyzing recurrence of hemorrhoids
other causes of liver damage, and
fatty liver.

Change Date

October 17, 2024

V.iii.6.2.a.  Considering Circumstances of Service When Determining SC for Gastrointestinal Disorders 

If the issue is service connection (SC) for dysentery or other gastrointestinal disease, assign great weight to any service under the following conditions since these conditions may have been the etiological or aggravating factor:
tropical service
imprisonment or internment under unsanitary conditions, or
food deprivation.
Reference:  For more information on establishing presumptive SC for dysentery and other tropical diseases, see 38 CFR 3.309(b).

V.iii.6.2.b.  Testing Not Required for SC for GERD

A diagnosis of GERD for SC purposes does not require documentation by medical imaging. 
38 CFR 4.114, DC 7206, Note (1) requires “findings” to be documented by one of three types of imaging:  barium swallow, computed tomography (CT), or esophagogastroduodenoscopy.  This refers to documentation of esophageal stricture for evaluation purposes.  It does not define a sufficient diagnosis of GERD for SC purposes. 
Note:  A 10-percent evaluation for GERD can also be assigned pursuant to 38 CFR 4.7 without imaging to document esophageal stricture when the Veteran requires daily medications.    

V.iii.6.2.c.  Establishing SC for Inguinal Hernia

Do not assume the preexistence of a hernia.  Determine preexistence on a factual basis. 
The following conditions are sufficient bases for SC:
in-service initial manifestation of hernial protrusion, and
recurrence during service, by aggravation, of a hernia previously surgically repaired.
Note:  Operation for repair of a preexisting inguinal hernia is not necessarily evidence of aggravation.
Reference:  For information on the presumption of soundness at entrance into service, see 38 CFR 3.304(b).

V.iii.6.2.d.  SC and Recurrence of Hemorrhoids

Initial awards of SC for hemorrhoids are governed by customary rules for SC included in 38 CFR 3.303.  
After SC is initially established, unless the award of SC for hemorrhoids was in error, consider recurrences after a period of absence of hemorrhoids post-service to be associated with the SC condition rather than a nonservice-connected superseding condition.
Reference:  For more information on reversing an erroneous decision, see
38 CFR 3.105(a), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A.

V.iii.6.2.e.  Example: Analyzing Recurrence of Hemorrhoids

Situation:  SC is established for hemorrhoids first diagnosed during service. A 0-percent evaluation was assigned under 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7336. 
 
Two years after SC was granted for hemorrhoids, the Veteran filed a claim for increased evaluation.  Examination showed no hemorrhoids.  The diagnosis was “hemorrhoids, not shown.”  The 0-percent evaluation was continued. 
 
Five years later the Veteran filed a claim for an increased evaluation for hemorrhoids.  Records showed three instances of doctor visits in the last year for external hemorrhoids with thrombosis.  The Veteran reported a history of “old” problems with hemorrhoids and recent symptoms including bright red blood noted with defecation and discomfort with protracted sitting in his current job.  A Department of Veterans Affairs examination included a similar history and showed external hemorrhoids with thrombosis.  The diagnosis was “external hemorrhoids.”  Examination findings and findings in treatment records demonstrate the criteria for 10-percent evaluation in 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7336. 
 
Result:  Assign a 10-percent evaluation.  The facts suggest that the SC hemorrhoids were non-disabling, or even absent, for an indeterminate period after SC was granted, and the Veteran’s current history in medical records and at the VA examination could suggest that the current hemorrhoids are due to a superseding post-service cause (protracted sitting at work).  However, the evidence does not prove that current hemorrhoids are due to a superseding cause or that SC was in error.  Pursuant to the principle in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.2.d, after SC is initially established, consider hemorrhoids shown after a period of absence to be associated with the SC condition rather than due to a superseding post service cause unless the award of SC for hemorrhoids was clearly in error.  Do not return the examination for comment on that question.  

V.iii.6.2.f.  Other Causes of Liver Damage

The table below describes recognized causes of liver damage and provides examples of each cause.
  
Cause of Liver Damage
Example 
Infection
Virus
Systemic diseases
Lupus
Drugs
Isoniazid
Acetaminophen
Phenytoin
Toxic substances
Alcohol


V.iii.6.2.g.  Fatty Liver

Fatty liver, also called hepatic steatosis, is not a disability for which SC can be granted.  By itself it is simply considered an abnormal laboratory finding. 
 
Reference:  For more information on abnormal laboratory findings discovered in STRs without a claim, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.1.d.

3.  Hepatitis 

Introduction

This topic contains information about hepatitis, including 
categories of hepatitis recognized for rating purposes
diagnostic testing required for hepatitis
interpreting lab reports for 
hepatitis B (HBV), and
hepatitis C (HCV) after 1992
risk factors for HBV and HCV
development for hepatitis risk factors
considering drug abuse in hepatitis claims
evaluating claims for increase for SC hepatitis awarded due to drug abuse
considering in-service hepatitis findings
requesting exams and/or opinions for HBV or HCV
reviewing hepatitis exams and opinions for sufficiency, and
assigning a 0-percent evaluation for HCV.

Change Date

April 21, 2025

V.iii.6.3.a.Categories of Hepatitis Recognized for Rating Purposes

There are three main categories of viral hepatitis recognized for rating purposes.  The table below describes each type of hepatitis and explains the transmission and prognosis for each.
Type of Hepatitis
Transmission
Prognosis
hepatitis A virus (HAV), previously called infectious hepatitis
fecal-oral route
Acute—seldom severe and does not leave residuals.
Note:  In order to award SC, there must be evidence of chronic residuals related to the hepatitis A infection. 
hepatitis B virus (HBV), previously called serum hepatitis
blood products
sexual contact
Acute in 90-95 percent of cases, but acute disease can be severe and result in death.
Chronic in 5-10 percent of cases.
Cirrhosis and liver cancer may develop.
A vaccine to prevent HBV infection is available.
hepatitis C virus (HCV), previously called non-A non-B hepatitis
infected blood
Clinically asymptomatic acute disease.
Chronic disease develops in 80 percent of cases following acute phase.
Diagnosis is generally made incidentally many years later.
Note:  Infectious hepatitis is common throughout the world and was especially prevalent during World War II following administration of the yellow fever vaccine in 1942 and in the Mediterranean Theater.
Reference:  For more information on risk factors for HBV and HCV, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.3.e.

V.iii.6.3.b.Diagnostic Testing Required for Hepatitis

SC for hepatitis requires blood serology testing to establish a diagnosis and identify the type of hepatitis present.  Liver function tests (LFTs) are necessary to assess the severity of the disease.
Notes:
The rating decision should always specify the type of hepatitis for which SC is awarded.
Serological tests determine the presence of antigens and antibodies to the specific virus.  The presence of antibodies to the specific virus indicates the infection is present. 
The table below describes types of serological testing required to confirm a diagnosis for each type of hepatitis.
Type of Hepatitis
Serology or Other Testing Required
Additional Notes
HAV
anti-HAV (antibodies to hepatitis A virus)
Anti-HAV are present in the blood one month after the acute illness and persist for life.
Serological blood testing showing the presence of anti-HAV indicates a past acute infection.
HBV
anti-HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen) is present during the acute phase.
HBsAg that persists more than three to six months indicates probable chronic disease or carrier status.
A positive Australian antigen test is sufficient to confirm HBV.
 
HBV has two antigens, a surface antigen and a core antigen
HBsAg, and
HBcAg (hepatitis B core antigen).
Consequently, two types of antibodies appear in the blood
anti-HBs (antibodies to the surface antigen), and
anti-HBc (antibodies to the core antigen).
HCV
EIA (enzyme immunoassay) or ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay, also called Western blot) is the first test.
If EIA or ELISA is positive, RIBA (recombinant immunoblot assay) is needed to confirm the diagnosis of chronic HCV.
In lieu of EIA/ELISA followed by RIBA, a positive test for HCV RNA (hepatitis C viral ribonucleic acid) is sufficient by itself to confirm a diagnosis of HCV.
HCV RNA results can be
qualitative (positive or negative), or
quantitative (number of copies per milliliter (ml)).
The presence of anti-HCV (including EIA or ELISA) is not sufficient for a diagnosis of chronic HCV because it can be present in other diseases.
Note:  Liver biopsy, ultrasound, and CT scan tests can detect damage to the liver but will not identify the type of infection.

V.iii.6.3.c.Interpreting Lab Reports for HBV

The table below provides an example of a laboratory interpretation of serology test results for HBV.
Test
Results
Interpretation
Example 1
HBsAg
negative
susceptible to infection
anti-HBc
negative
susceptible to infection (no HBV)
anti-HBs
negative
no history of HBV

Example 2
HBsAg
negative
immune
anti-HBc
negative or positive
immune
anti-HBs
positive


Example 3
HBsAg
positive
acute infection
anti-HBc
positive

Immunoglobulin M (IgM) anti-HBc
positive
acute infection
anti-HBs
negative


Example 4
HBsAg
positive
chronic infection
anti-HBc
positive

IgM anti-HBc
negative
chronic infection
anti-HBs
negative



V.iii.6.3.d.Interpreting Lab Reports for HCV After 1992

The table below provides an example of a laboratory interpretation of serology testing for HCV for testing performed after 1992.
Tests 
Results
Interpretation
anti-HCV
positive (probable chronic hepatitis)
need to verify diagnosis
EIA
positive
supplemental test required
RIBA
positive
diagnostic
HCVRNA
follow-up of chronic HCV
not needed for rating


V.iii.6.3.e.  Risk Factors for HBV and HCV

Risk factors for the development of HBV and HCV are similar.  The table below describes the medically recognized risk factors for HBV and HCV infection, provides transmission information concerning those risk factors, and includes tips for confirming the risk factors.
Note:  Resolve reasonable doubt under 38 CFR 3.102 in favor of the Veteran when the evidence favoring risk factor(s) in service is equal to the evidence favoring risk factor(s) before or after service.
Risk Factor
Transmission Information 
Rating Tips
transfusion of blood or blood product
before 1992 for HCV, or
before 1975 for HBV
organ transplant before 1992, or
hemodialysis
Blood donor screening for HCV was not available until 1989 when HCV was identified.
In 1992, more effective screening of blood became possible for HCV.
If blood transfusion is a claimed risk factor, obtain the relevant hospital records from service, if possible.
Look for evidence of blood transfusions in surgical reports, especially the
anesthesia sheet
surgical record
operative clinical records, or
post-operative clinical notes.
tattoos
body piercing, and
acupuncture with non-sterile needles
transmitted through the use of unsterilized equipment
Review for indications of tattoos or piercings on induction and separation exams to help determine whether tattooing or piercing took place in service.
intravenous drug use
transmitted through the use of shared instruments
Records of drug treatment may reflect the type of drug abuse.
high-risk sexual activity
Transmission risk is relatively low but increases with multiple sexual partners.
Periodic health assessments or records of treatment for sexually transmitted diseases may document a history of high-risk sexual activity or multiple sexual partners.
intranasal cocaine use
transmitted through the use of shared instruments
Records of drug treatment may reflect the type of drug abuse.
accidental exposure to blood by percutaneous exposure or on mucous membranes
common for the following:
health care workers
combat medics, and
corpsmen
Consider service department or other records reflecting occupational history.
sharing of
toothbrushes, or
shaving razors
transmitted through direct percutaneous exposure to blood
This type of in-service exposure will not generally be documented in service records. Consider buddy statements in the context of the entire evidence picture pertaining to risk factors.
immunization with a jet air gun injector
onedocumented case of HBV transmission
Despite the lack of any scientific evidence to document transmission of HCV with air gun injectors, it is biologically possible.
A medical report linking hepatitis to air gun injectors must include a full discussion of all potential modes of transmission and a rationale as to why the examiner believes the air gun injector was the source for the hepatitis infection.
Reference:  For more information on development for and the concession of in-service risk factors associated with HCV, see Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet.App. 151 (2021).

V.iii.6.3.f.Development for Hepatitis Risk Factors

As VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, does not inform the claimant to submit evidence of hepatitis risk factors, development for risk factors is required in every hepatitis claim, even when hepatitis is diagnosed in service.  Development is necessary to determine if pre- and post-service risk factors are present as well as to ensure that the risk factor is not substance abuse either before or during service.
Regardless of what claim form the Veteran submits, development for risk factors is required if the complete risk factor history has not already been provided.  If risk factor history is not of record send a risk factor development letter to the Veteran.
References:  For more information on
SC for hepatitis associated with drug use, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.3.g, and
examinations and medical opinions in hepatitis claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.3.j.  

V.iii.6.3.g.Considering Drug Abuse in Hepatitis Claims

If one of the risk factors for hepatitis is intravenous or intramuscular drug use, or intranasal cocaine use, do not automatically assume the substance abuse is the cause of hepatitis and deny the claim on that basis. 
Follow the steps in the table below when considering a claim for SC for hepatitis in which injection drug or intranasal cocaine use is a confirmed in-service risk factor. 
Step
Action
1
Review for all risk factors of hepatitis in addition to the drug use.
2
If injection drug or intranasal cocaine use is the only confirmed in-service risk factor present, then deny SC. If other in-service risk factors are found in addition to injection drug or intranasal cocaine use, go to Step 3.
3
Request a medical opinion to determine which confirmed in-service risk factor is at least as likely as not the cause of the hepatitis infection.
4
Use the table below to determine how to proceed with the medical opinion.
If the medical opinion …
Then …
states that drug use is the cause of the hepatitis infection
deny the claim for SC for hepatitis.
gives greater or equal weight to another confirmed in-service risk factor
resolve reasonable doubt in the Veteran’s favor, and
award SC.
is unable to state which risk factor is more likely than not to be the cause of the hepatitis
weigh all evidence, and
apply the reasonable doubt doctrine if the evidence is found to be in equipoise.
Reference:  For more information on examiner statements that an opinion would be speculative, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.q.

Reference:  For more information on considering claims for SC based on drug use, see
38 CFR 3.301(c)(3), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.D.2.

V.iii.6.3.h.﻿  Evaluating Claims for Increase for SC Hepatitis Awarded Due to Drug Abuse

Follow the steps in the table below to determine the appropriate actions to take in a claim for increase when SC was previously awarded but the only apparent risk factor in service was drug abuse.
Step
Action
1
Was SC for hepatitis due to drug abuse awarded by rating decision on or before October 31, 1990?
If yes, then continue the finding of SC for hepatitis as the award of SC was proper based on regulations and procedures at that time. Go to Step 5.
If no, then go to Step 2.
2
Does the evidence clearly show that the hepatitis is due to in-service drug abuse?
If yes, go to Step 4.
If no, go to Step 3.
3
If SC was awarded but there is no evidence clearly linking the hepatitis to drug abuse or if there were multiple risk factors in service, one of which was drug abuse, and no prior opinion was obtained, request a medical opinion to determine whether the hepatitis is due to the drug abuse.
If the resulting opinion
clearly links hepatitis to drug abuse, go to Step 4.
cannot resolve whether hepatitis is due to drug abuse or another in-service risk factor, or the hepatitis is attributed to another non-drug abuse in-service risk factor, then
resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and continue the finding of SC, and
award an increased evaluation for hepatitis if the medical evidence otherwise shows the increase is warranted.
4
If the evidence clearly shows that the hepatitis is due to in-service drug abuse and SC was awarded by rating decision after October 31, 1990, determine whether the award of SC is protected per 38 CFR 3.957.
If SC. is protected, go to Step 5.
If SC is not protected, then propose to sever SC per 38 CFR 3.105(a).
5
If SC was properly established for hepatitis due to drug abuse by rating decision on or before October 31, 1990, and/or if the award of SC for hepatitis is protected, do not award an increased evaluation for hepatitis due to drug abuse.
Notes:
The Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-508 Section 8052) prohibited the grant of SC for disability or death resulting from alcohol or drug abuse for claims filed after October 31, 1990.
VAOPGCPREC 2-1998 found that an increased evaluation may not be awarded when SC was previously properly established as due to drug abuse by rating decision on or before October 31, 1990.

V.iii.6.3.i.Considering In-Service Hepatitis Findings

When a Veteran submits a claim for SC of hepatitis, assess the lay evidence, service treatment records (STRs), and current medical records to ascertain whether a current disability, an in-service event or injury, and an indication of an association are present as required in 38 CFR 3.159(c)(4) prior to requesting examination and/or medical opinion. 
Use the table below to determine the proper rating action for in-service findings related to hepatitis.
If STRs show ...
Then ...
diagnosis of non-specific hepatitis and SC is claimed many years later
request an exam with serology testing and LFTs (if not already of record) and opinion to determine if a relationship exists between the episode of hepatitis in service and the current type of hepatitis unless there is sufficient evidence of a clearly-established diagnosis and continuous symptoms present to satisfy the nexus standard under 38 CFR 3.303(b).
laboratory findings confirming HAV or HBV
SC for HAV is not warranted as HAV is an acute condition.
Consider SC for HBV if a chronic disability is present and linked to the in-service finding and/or risk factors.
Consider SC for HCV if a medical opinion links the condition to the confirmed in-service findings and/or risk factors.  However, do not automatically grant SC for HCV.  The lab findings in service alone do not show HCV in service or allow a conclusion that HCV was incurred in service.  Each type of hepatitis can be acquired at different times and through different means.   
a diagnosis of non-A, non-B hepatitis (old name for HCV) and the current medical evidence confirms a diagnosis of HCV
SC is likely warranted.
If medical evidence establishes the presence of continuous symptoms since service, then award SC.
If evidence of continuous symptoms since service is not present, request a nexus opinion.
non-specific hepatitis and current evidence shows HCV or chronic HBV only
HCV or chronic HBV may warrant SC based on reasonable doubt. Request a medical opinion and any necessary diagnostic testing to confirm the diagnosis.
Reference:  For more information on diagnostic testing required for hepatitis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.3.b.
non-specific hepatitis and current evidence shows HCV orchronic HBV as well as a history of HAV
a medical opinion is necessary to determine whether the current disability is a result of the non-specific hepatitis diagnosed in service.


V.iii.6.3.j.Requesting Exams and/or Opinions for HBV or HCV

Follow the steps in the table below when requesting an examination and/or opinion for HCV or chronic HBV.
Step
Action
1
Identify and request the examiner review of all relevant evidence in the claims folder.
2
List any risk factors identified by the Veteran.
3
Identify all risk factors confirmed by the evidence in the claims folder, whether claimed by the Veteran or not.
Important:  In addition to in-service risk factors, ensure that all documented pre- and post-service risk factors are noted in the exam request.
4
Request Hepatitis, Cirrhosis And Other Liver Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire.
5
Request a medical opinion about the relationship between the current HBV or HCV infection and confirmed or supported risk factor(s).
6
Notify the examiner that a positive nexus opinion, if warranted, should take only confirmed risk factors as shown by the objective evidence of record into consideration.
References:  For more information on
confirming risk factors, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6.3.e, and
evaluating evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.

V.iii.6.3.k.Reviewing Hepatitis Exams and Opinions for Sufficiency

Review the examination or opinion to ensure sufficiency and return insufficient examinations when warranted.  Common reasons for insufficient examinations are
lack of proper confirmatory testing to support the diagnosis
failure to include complete clinical findings and symptoms in the report
failure to address all known risk factors in the opinion
opinions linking HCV or chronic HBV to a risk factor that is not confirmed in the evidence of record, and
opinions improperly linking HCV or chronic HBV to a risk factor that is not medically recognized as a source of infection.

V.iii.6.3.l.Assigning a 0-Percent Evaluation for HCV

To assign an evaluation for HCV (38 CFR 4.114, DC 7354) use the criteria in 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7345 (chronic liver disease without cirrhosis).
 
A 0-percent evaluation should only be assigned for HCV when the condition is asymptomatic with a previous history of liver disease. 
Use the table below to determine when it is appropriate to assign a 0-percent evaluation for HCV.
If medical evidence shows ...
Then a 0-percent disability evaluation is ...
even mild symptoms related to HCV infection
not appropriate because the Veteran is symptomatic.
there is evidence of liver damage on LFTs, liver biopsy, or other testing
not appropriate because this means the infection is not healed.
HCV has responded to therapy to the extent that RNA test results are negative, and the Veteran is now asymptomatic with no evidence of liver damage
appropriate. However, HCV remains dormant in the system and may flare up again later.
Reference:  For more information on evaluation of HCV, see 38 CFR 4.114, DC 7354.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 7 - Genitourinary Disabilities
Article ID: 554400000180593
Updated Sep 30, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1 
General Rating Principles for Genitourinary Disabilities
2
Evaluating Nephritis and Nephropathy
3
Prostate Conditions
4
Erectile Dysfunction (ED)
5
Other Genitourinary Considerations


        
1.  General Rating Principles for Genitourinary Disabilities
    

Introduction

This topic contains guidance on the general principles for evaluating genitourinary dysfunction, including
rating genitourinary disorders
renal dysfunction
determining the chronicity of renal dysfunction
use of catheters and other appliances
urinary tract infection 
recurrent stone formation, and
changes in the rating schedule for the genitourinary system.

Change Date

November 15, 2021

V.iii.7.1.a.  Rating Genitourinary Disorders

The diagnostic codes (DCs) for genitourinary disorders are at 38 CFR 4.115b.  Many of those are rated by the rating formulas for dysfunction provided in 38 CFR 4.115a.  The three types of genitourinary dysfunction are
voiding dysfunction, which provides evaluations based on
frequency
leakage, and/or
obstructed voiding
urinary tract infections, and
renal dysfunction.
38 CFR 4.115a provides that diseases of the genitourinary system generally result in disabilities related to renal or voiding dysfunctions, infections, or a combination of these.
Where a particular DC lists more than one dysfunction under which the condition can be rated, only the predominant area of dysfunction shall be utilized for rating purposes.  Separate evaluations may not be assigned for different types of dysfunction attributable to a single condition.
When different genitourinary conditions are present and each is evaluated using a different type of dysfunction, separate evaluations may be assigned.
When different genitourinary conditions are present but each is evaluated using the same type of dysfunction, separate evaluations may not be assigned.
Important:
Ensure in every case that rating decisions not pyramid or separate individual findings when those findings in their entirety constitute one disability as discussed at M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b. 
38 CFR 4.115a acknowledges that since the areas of dysfunction do not cover all symptoms resulting from genitourinary diseases, specific diagnoses may include a description of symptoms assigned to that diagnosis.
Example:  For pyelonephritis, 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7504 directs to rate as renal dysfunction or urinary tract infection, whichever is predominant.  If symptoms of both renal dysfunction and urinary tract infection are present and associated with pyelonephritis, assign a single evaluation based on the most disabling symptoms. 
 

V.iii.7.1.b.  Renal Dysfunction

Renal dysfunction is evaluated using specific, objective laboratory findings.
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is widely accepted as the best overall measure of kidney function in health and disease.  There is an inverse correlation between GFR and functional impairment.
Lower GFRs correspond to greater impairment.
Individuals with GFRs less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 are considered to have chronic renal disease.
A GFR less than 15 mL/min/1.73 m2 is a sign of renal failure. 
GFR, estimated GFR (eGFR), and creatinine-based approximations are acceptable for evaluation purposes, as each has been shown to be an adequate indicator of the stage of chronic kidney disease.  Elevated creatinine levels are correlated with decreasing GFR.
Proteinuria, as measured by increased urinary excretion of albumin, is an early and sensitive maker of kidney damage and is reflected by an albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) of 30 mg/g or greater.

V.iii.7.1.c.  Determining Chronicity of Renal Dysfunction

Assignment of a compensable evaluation for renal dysfunction based on abnormal GFR or (other findings accepted for evaluation purposes under 38 CFR 4.115a) is premised upon findings spanning over three consecutive  months. 
 
Satisfaction of the three-month requirement does not necessitate an individual finding in each month of a three-month period.  Rather, clinical data showing an abnormal finding with another repeated abnormal finding 3 or more months later during a 12-month period will document chronicity of the impairment and will be sufficient to satisfy this requirement unless there is evidence to the contrary.
 
It is expected that an individual with chronic renal dysfunction would be followed for treatment and clinical data would be sufficient to document chronicity of findings over the three month or longer period. 
 
However, when such clinical data is unavailable to decision makers, a one-time finding may be used to assign the corresponding disability evaluation unless there is evidence that suggests non-chronicity of the impairment. 
When a compensable evaluation is assigned based on a one-time finding of abnormal GFR, defer the end product and schedule an at-once examination to obtain a second GFR reading three months after the first. 
This at-once examination is necessary to satisfy the regulatory requirement for sustained findings from a three-month period.
Reference:  For more information on handling improvement shown on the at-once examination, see
38 CFR 3.105(e), and
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 4.A.

V.iii.7.1.d.  Use of Catheters and Other Appliances

The term appliance, as used in the criteria for voiding dysfunction under 38 CFR 4.115a, includes all types of catheters, as well as any other assistive device for urination.
Important:  Appliances, including catheters, may be used to treat urine leakage associated with voiding dysfunction and/or urine retention associated with obstructed voiding.  The rating activity should review the evidence carefully to determine whether the appliance is required to treat urine leakage or urine retention and evaluate on the predominant disability.
Note:  For the purposes of evaluating urinary tract infection at the 30-percent rate, the use of catheters is not considered comparable to drainage by stent or nephrostomy and is inconsistent with the remainder of the criteria required for a 30-percent evaluation.  Stent and nephrostomy tube insertion are surgical procedures and require more intensive management than drainage by catheterization. 
Example 1:  A Veteran is service-connected (SC) for a bladder injury.  Medical records show a catheter is required for urine leakage due to the bladder injury.
Result:  A 60-percent evaluation should be assigned for this disability based on voiding dysfunction.
Example 2:  A Veteran is SC for a bladder injury. Medical records show a catheter is required for urine retention due to the bladder injury.
Result:  A 30-percent evaluation should be assigned for this disability based on obstructed voiding.
Reference:  For more information on ratings of the genitourinary system based on voiding dysfunction, see 38 CFR 4.115a.

V.iii.7.1.e.  Urinary Tract Infection

The following terms are utilized in the criteria for evaluating urinary tract infection.
 
Suppressive drug therapy, as identified in the criteria for the 0- and 10-percent disability evaluations, refers to the use of prolonged suppressive antibiotic therapy or medications for treatment of urinary tract infections.  The required duration of the therapy is identified in the rating criteria. 
 
Continuous intensive management, as identified in the criteria for the 30-percent disability evaluation, refers to the requirement for treatment beyond the use of antibiotic or other medications or hospitalizations as described in the 0- and 10-percent evaluation levels.  Examples of this level of care include but are not limited surgical management of the nephrostomy and/or stent, intravenous antibiotics, or treatment that is otherwise required for the maintenance of the nephrostomy tube or stent.  

V.iii.7.1.f.  Recurrent Stone Formation

Under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7508, a 30-percent disability evaluation is assigned when evidence shows recurrent stone formation requiring invasive or non-invasive procedures more than 2 times per year.
Examples of therapeutic procedures that would satisfy these requirements include (but are not limited to)
invasive procedures, such as
open surgical lithotomy
percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL)
retrograde intrarenal surgery (RIRS), or
other minimally invasive endourological treatments, and
non-invasive procedures, such as
shockwave lithotripsy (SWL), or
ureteroscopic fragmentation and retrieval.
Recurrent stone formation means that there must be more than one episode of stone formation requiring treatment during a one-year period.

V.iii.7.1.g.  Changes in the Rating Schedule for the Genitourinary System 

The rating criteria for the genitourinary system have undergone historical changes.  Recent full-scale revisions were effective on the following dates:
November 14, 2021, and
February 17, 1994.
Note:  These changes in the rating criteria
are not considered liberalizing, and
should not be the basis for a reduction in disability rating unless medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved.  

2.  Evaluating Nephritis and Nephropathy
    

Introduction

This topic contains information about general principles for rating genitourinary disabilities, including
definition of nephropathy
evaluating nephropathy
evaluation of nephropathy and hypertension
definition of nephritis
characteristics of nephritis
evaluating nephritis
limits on separate evaluation of nephritis and cardiovascular conditions, and
distinguishing nephritis from other types of nephropathy.

Change Date

November 15, 2021

V.iii.7.2.a.  Definition:  Nephropathy

Nephropathy is generally defined as a condition encompassing disease or damage of the kidneys.  Nephropathy is a broader term to describe any condition that impairs renal function. Examples of nephropathy include (but are not limited to) chronic renal disease, nephrotic syndrome, and nephritis.

V.iii.7.2.b.  Evaluating Nephropathy

For Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) disability purposes, nephropathy is evaluated as renal dysfunction under 38 CFR 4.115a.
The most commonly used DC for nephropathy is 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7541, “renal involvement in diabetes mellitus type I or II,” otherwise known as diabetic nephropathy. 
Important:  When the renal impairment is a form of nephritis, 38 CFR 4.115applies as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.2.f.

V.iii.7.2.c.  Evaluation of Nephropathy and Hypertension

The provision of 38 CFR 4.115 that states that separate ratings are not to be assigned for disability from disease of the heart and any form of nephritis does not apply when evaluating other types of nephropathy because nephropathy is a broader diagnostic classification warranting its own evaluative approach.  Other types of nephropathy may be assigned separate evaluations for the renal impairment and heart disease and/or hypertension.
 
Note:  Prior to the revision of 38 CFR 4.115a effective on November 14, 2021, hypertension was included among the criteria for evaluation of renal dysfunction.  Consequently, under the historical criteria, separate evaluations could not be assigned for hypertension and nephropathy except when dialysis was required or when the condition was characterized by absence of the kidney as assignment of separate evaluations would have been in violation of 38 CFR 4.14.
Reference:  For more information on the historical prohibition against separate evaluations for hypertension and nephropathy in place prior to November 14, 2021, see
38 CFR 4.14, and
the attachment titled Historical_M21-1V_iii_7_9-15-21.

V.iii.7.2.d.  Definition:  Nephritis

Nephritis is generally defined as inflammation of the kidneys.  It includes inflammation of any renal structure such as glomeruli, tubules, or interstitial tissue. Nephritis is a form of nephropathy.

V.iii.7.2.e.  Characteristics of Nephritis

38 CFR 4.115 discusses several medical concepts pertaining to nephritis. These concepts may be useful in determining when the duty to assist requires an examination or opinion or when medical results may need clarification.
Characteristics of glomerular nephritis
Usually preceded by or associated with severe infectious disease.
Sudden onset.
Course marked by red blood cells, salt retention, and edema.
May clear up entirely or progress to a chronic condition.
Characteristics of nephrosclerotic nephritis
Originating in hypertension or arteriosclerosis.
Develops slowly.
Minimum laboratory findings.
Associated with natural progress.
Albuminuria alone is not nephritis. 
Do not accept the presence of transient symptoms, such as elevated albumin and the presence of casts following febrile illness as establishing nephritis.  

V.iii.7.2.f. Evaluating Nephritis

Chronic nephritis is addressed in 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7502.  It is rated as renal dysfunction under 38 CFR 4.115a.  Glomerulonephritis (38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7536) and interstitial nephritis (38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7537) also use the renal dysfunction criteria.  
 
Note:  When nephrosclerosis arises from nephritis, the evaluation criteria under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7507 directs that
nephrosclerosis be rated according to the predominant symptoms as
renal dysfunction
hypertension, or
heart disease, and
if nephrosclerosis is rated under the cardiovascular schedule, the rating which would otherwise be assigned will be elevated to the next higher level.

V.iii.7.2.g.  Limits on Separate Evaluation of Nephritis and Cardiovascular Conditions

38 CFR 4.115 states that separate ratings cannot be assigned for disability from disease of the heart and any form of nephritis.
The rationale is that there is a close interrelationship between cardiovascular disabilities and nephritis.
 
Example 1:  The following separate evaluations are not permitted under 38 CFR 4.115 even if the nephritis evaluation was supportable based on definite decrease in renal function.
7101
Hypertension
10
7502
Nephritis
60
  
Exceptions:  Separate ratings for any hypertension or heart disease are permitted in the following scenarios:
chronic renal disease has progressed to the point where regular dialysis is required, or
if absence of a kidney is the sole renal disability, even if removal was required because of nephritis.
Example 2:  The following separate evaluations are allowed since absence of the kidney is the sole renal disability. 
7500
Kidney – removal of one, history of glomerulonephritis
30
7101
Hypertension
20
 
Example 3:  The following separate evaluations are allowed if the 100-percent evaluation for nephritis is based on the requirement for dialysis.
7530
Nephritis
100
7101
Hypertension
10
Reference:  For more information on nephritis, including the different types of nephritis, see
38 CFR 4.115, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.2.f.

V.iii.7.2.h.  Distinguishing Nephritis From Other Types of Nephropathy 

Although a condition may be diagnosed as nephropathy, the evidence must be carefully examined to determine if the diagnosed nephropathy can be clinically recognized as a form of nephritis that would trigger 38 CFR 4.115 application.
A nephropathy diagnosis is not dispositive for the purpose of making this distinction. 
Additional review of the evidence beyond the given diagnosis will be necessary to determine whether the renal condition, irrespective of the diagnosis, is a form of nephritis.
In the following examples, the diagnosis contains the term “nephropathy” but the disability is actually a type of nephritis and must be evaluated with consideration of 38 CFR 4.115.
IgA nephropathy is generally characterized clinically as a type of primary glomerulonephritis.
38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7537 is the DC for interstitial nephritis, and gouty nephropathy is identified as a type of interstitial nephritis as well as other disorders of calcium metabolism.
Important: 
When the clinical evidence is unclear, request a medical opinion to determine whether the disability in question is a type of nephritis.
It is impermissible to evaluate a type of nephritis specifically identified in the rating schedule, such as gouty nephropathy, by analogy in an effort to achieve a higher disability evaluation. 

        
3.  Prostate Conditions
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about prostate conditions, including
benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH)
diagnosis of prostate cancer by biopsy
rating prostate cancer, and
ED and special monthly compensation (SMC) due to prostate cancer.

Change Date

June 14, 2019

V.iii.7.3.a.  BPH

Benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) is evaluated under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7527based on associated voiding dysfunction or urinary tract infection, but can be evaluated as renal dysfunction when applicable.  Consider the following when rating BPH:
BPH and some types of treatment for BPH, such as alpha blocker drugs, finasteride, or balloon dilation, can cause incontinence.
Retrograde ejaculation can result from some types of BPH treatment, especially transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP).
Special monthly compensation (SMC) (k) may be warranted if there is associated erectile dysfunction (ED) or retrograde ejaculation as a result of treatment or if hormone therapy is used.  SMC entitlement is determined on a factual basis.

V.iii.7.3.b.Diagnosis of Prostate Cancer by Biopsy

A diagnosis of prostate cancer is made only on the basis of a prostate biopsy.  An elevated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test is not diagnostic of cancer.
Exception:  A prostate biopsy is not required to support a medical diagnosis that prostate cancer has recurred after radical prostatectomy.  
When the initial diagnosis of prostate cancer was confirmed by biopsy and the evidence shows recurrence following any type of treatment, repeat biopsy is not required.  
The fact that the diagnosis of recurrence considered PSA does not make the assessment insufficient for rating purposes.  An assessment should, however, be based on more than PSA results such as, but not limited to, other clinical findings, reports of symptoms, or other medical evidence

V.iii.7.3.c. Rating Prostate Cancer

The table below describes common treatments for prostate cancer as well as the side effects and rating considerations associated with the treatment.
Type of Treatment
Potential Side Effects
Rating Considerations
Watchful waiting
also called
conservative management
observation, or
surveillance, and
no immediate specific therapy is being used, but cancer is active.
None, except for the continued presence and potential metastasis of cancer
often used when life expectancy is short due to age or other illness since prostate cancer is slow- growing.
Review to confirm the continuation of active cancer previously confirmed by biopsy.
Evaluate at 100 percent, despite the lack of treatment and possible lack of symptoms.
Note:  If watchful waiting is used to closely monitor inactive cancer that is in remission, evaluate based on residuals since the cancer is no longer active. 
Radical prostatectomy surgery which 
is characterized by removal of the prostate gland and seminal vesicles
is the most common treatment for localized cancer
can be curative, and
may involve a nerve-sparing procedure to improve chances that the patient will retain normal erectile function.
Impotence, and/or
incontinence.
In all cases of radical prostatectomy, award SMC (k) for loss of use (LOU) of a creative organ.
Consider service connection (SC) for ED on a facts-found basis.
Cryotherapy, also known as cryosurgery or cryoablation, is a procedure by which the prostate and nearby tissues are frozen with liquid nitrogen via probes in the perineum.
Impotence
incontinence
urethral scarring, and
rectourethral fistula (rare).
Consider SMC (k) on a facts-found basis.
Radiation
can be curative if cancer is confined to the prostate and surrounding tissues and PSA is 15 nanograms (ng)/ml or less
is also used as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms of advanced cancer, such as bone pain due to metastasis, and
can be
internal radiation therapy, or brachytherapy, in which radioactive seeds are implanted in the prostate, including
high dose radiation (HDR) in which seeds are implanted for less than a day and then removed, and radiation is present only while seeds are in place, or
low dose radiation (LDR) in which seeds are permanently implanted and give off radiation for weeks to months, depending on the radioisotope used, or
external radiation therapy, in which radiation is delivered by high-energy eternal radiation for six to eight weeks.
After external beam radiation 
impotence, and/or
incontinence, and
after brachytherapy
impotence
incontinence
bowel problems, and/or
urethral complications.
After internal HDR 
the radiation continues only for hours or days, so a six-month assignment of temporary 100-percent under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7528 is appropriate, and
consider SMC (k) for impotence on a facts-found basis.
After internal LDR
the effective radiation should be gone by one year
assign a 100-percent evaluation for one year, and
schedule a review exam six months following the cessation of the one-year treatment period.
Note:  If radiation is used only as palliative therapy in advanced cancer, the 100-percent evaluation will continue because the cancer will remain active.  Therefore
review for metastatic disease, and
consider permanency.
Hormone therapy is primarily for palliation of prostate cancer which is not confined to the prostate for the purpose of testosterone deprivation.
Types of hormone therapy include
orchiectomy, the removal of testes to prevent testosterone production
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone agonists (LHRH analogs), which can lower the testosterone as effectively as orchiectomy such as
Lupron (leuprolide)
Zoladex (goserelin), and
busrelin
estrogens or estrogen-like drugs, which lower the level of testosterone
second-line hormonal drugs, which are used when first-line hormone therapy fails
anti-androgens, which block the ability of the body to use androgens, such as
Eulexin (flutamide)
Casodex (bicalutamide), and
Nilandron (nilutamide), and
combined hormone therapy, which is an anti-androgen combined with orchiectomy or an LHRH agonist (analog).
After any hormone therapy
hot flashes
osteoporosis
loss of muscle mass
after orchiectomy
impotence
sterility
loss of sex drive
after anti-androgen therapy
gastrointestinal upset
breast tenderness
gynecomastia
decreased libido
impotence
hot flashes, and
after LHRH analogs 
impotence
hot flashes, and
gynecomastia.
Orchiectomy results in anatomical loss of a creative organ; therefore
evaluate under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7524, and
award SMC.
Hormone therapy may continue for many years; therefore
review treatment records for expected duration of treatment, and
consider permanence.
Chemotherapy
Depending on the type of chemotherapy used, there are multiple possible side effects.
Chemotherapy is used for palliation as current agents will not eradicate prostate cancer; therefore
evaluate as 100 percent
consider permanence
review for metastatic disease, and
if metastatic disease affects body systems other than the genitourinary system, award a separate evaluation for confirmed metastatic disease under the appropriate code for that body system.
References:  For more information on
assigning staged evaluations for prostate cancer. see
Tatum v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.App 139, 141 (2010)
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.D.3.e and f, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.j
considering entitlement to SC for ED and SC for LOU of a creative organ associated with prostate cancer, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.3.d, and
evaluating cancer and its residuals, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.5.a and b.

V.iii.7.3.d. ED and SMC Due to Prostate Cancer

SC for prostate cancer does not automatically result in
SC for ED, or
entitlement to SMC (k).
There are various treatments for prostate cancer, such as hormonal therapy, that may result in ED.  Refer to M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.3.c for more information about specific types of treatment and the associated side effects, such as ED or LOU of a creative organ. 
 
Note:  General guidelines under 38 CFR 3.400 should be followed when determining the effective date for ED.  If ED is the basis for SMC (k), the effective date for the SMC will generally coincide with the date SC is awarded for ED.
Exception:  Radical prostatectomy is a special case.  In all cases where prostate cancer is treated with radical prostatectomy, award entitlement to SMC (k) for LOU of a creative organ without additional examination or medical opinion. 
Radical prostatectomy results in loss of ejaculatory power and will warrant SMC (k) from the date of the procedure, assuming that the Veteran is already SC for prostate cancer from that date.
Entitlement to SC for ED associated with the radical prostatectomy is a separate factual determination.  For the purposes of determining SMC entitlement following radical prostatectomy, it is irrelevant whether ED also exists at the time the SMC is awarded.
Reference:  For more information on when SMC is warranted for ED and other sexual dysfunction, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.4.b.

 
4.  ED
    

Introduction

This topic contains information about ED, including
ED
SMC associated with ED or other sexual dysfunction
ED associated with systemic disease, and
scars associated with ED.

Change Date

November 15, 2021

V.iii.7.4.a. ED

ED is evaluated with a noncompensable evaluation under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7522 without regard to whether penile deformity is present.
Reference:  For more information on evaluating deformity of the penis under the version of the rating schedule in effect prior to November 14, 2021, see Williams v. Wilkie, 30 Vet.App. 134 (2018).

V.iii.7.4.b.Entitlement to SMC Associated With ED or Other Sexual Dysfunction

Grant SMC (k) when the evidence shows that SC ED constitutes LOU of a creative organ.  Other diagnoses of sexual dysfunction that may result in LOU include (but are not limited to) loss of libido, loss of sexual drive, or impotence.
 
When a VA examiner finds that there is ED or other sexual dysfunction, SMC (k) is established even though 
the Veteran can achieve erection and penetration with the use of medication, or
the Veteran had a vasectomy prior to the development of the LOU of a creative organ, as vasectomies may be reversible while LOU is not.
When the evidence, including an examination report or other medical information, shows that a diagnosis of ED or other sexual dysfunction is present but indicates that the Veteran can penetrate and ejaculate without the use of medication, resolve reasonable doubt in the Veteran’s favor and interpret the report to establish that LOU of a creative organ is present and grant entitlement to SMC (k). 
Exception:  Do not establish SMC(k) based on an examiner’s finding/conclusion that there is ED if
the examination is insufficient for rating purposes because it is not supported by a valid rationale and/or by the evidence of record (for example if the examiner checks that there is ED but there is no history, examination or other basis for the finding)
the report is based on the claimant’s report of ED but there is some specific evidence that the claimant’s account of ED lacks credibility, or
the preponderance (greater weight) of the evidence proves the contrary.
References:  For more information on
entitlement to SMC (k) for LOU of a creative organ, see
38 CFR 3.350(a)(1), and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4
entitlement to SMC (k) associated with radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.3.d, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.c
evaluating ED, see 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7522, and
insufficient examination reports, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.C, and
procedures for evaluating evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.

V.iii.7.4.c.  ED Associated With Systemic Disease

When evaluating residuals of a systemic disease process such as multiple sclerosis or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and associated ED, award SC for ED and assign a separate evaluation for the ED when it is otherwise appropriate to separately evaluate residuals. 
 
Exception:  Noncompensable complications of diabetes mellitus must be evaluated with the disease process as provided in 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913.
 
Reference:  For more information on the assignment of a separate evaluation for ED associated with systemic disease processes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.C.

V.iii.7.4.d.  Scars Associated With ED 

Evaluations for ED assigned under 38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7522 account for the functional impairment arising from disease or traumatic injury.  Evaluation under this DC does not preclude a separate evaluation for non-functional impairment, such as painful scarring, under 38 CFR 4.118 when otherwise warranted. 

  
5.  Other Genitourinary Considerations
  
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about other genitourinary considerations, including
residuals of venereal disease or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related illness
kidney donation
hydrocele and varicocele, and
infertility.

Change Date

September 30, 2025

V.iii.7.5.a.Residuals of Venereal Disease or HIV-Related Illness

Do not consider specific residuals of venereal disease or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related illness to be the result of willful misconduct.
 
Determine SC for residuals of venereal disease or HIV-related illness by the same general principles applicable to resolution of the issue of SC for other diseases.
 
References:  For more information on
willful misconduct and venereal disease, see 38 CFR 3.301(c)(1)
considering claims for SC of human papillomavirus infection (HPV), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.2.f, and
disability or death from use of drugs, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.D.

V.iii.7.5.b.  Kidney Donation

Kidney donation and any expected residual effects thereof are not subject to SC. Kidney donation is considered an elective surgery, and therefore, does not meet the provisions of a disease or injury incurred coincident with service.
 Reference:  For more information about the principles relating to SC, see
38 CFR 3.303, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.

V.iii.7.5.c.  Hydrocele and Varicocele 

Hydrocele is a collection of fluid in the scrotum.
 
Varicocele is a dilatation of the veins along the cord that receives blood from the testicles.
 
These conditions may be associated with a decrease in fertility and, in rare instances, may be associated with infertility.  In instances where there is a clinical finding of infertility which is linked to the hydrocele or varicocele, entitlement to SMC is warranted. 

V.iii.7.5.d.Infertility

Infertility, as defined in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C, 4.a, can be a symptom or consequence of injury or disease.  If a Veteran claims SC for infertility, rate the underlying injury or disease under the appropriate DC.  Do not establish SC for infertility itself. 
SMC due to anatomical loss or LOU of a creative organ is warranted if there is an SC condition resulting in infertility.
References:  For more information on
claims involving contentions of infertility, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.4
gynecological disorders that can be associated with infertility, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A, and
entitlement to SMC (k) for anatomical loss or LOU of a creative organ, see
38 CFR 3.350(a)
38 CFR 4.116, Note 2, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.a-d.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 8, Section A - Disabilities of the Gynecological System
Article ID: 554400000180511
Updated Sep 30, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1 
Female Sexual Arousal Disorder (FSAD)
2
Other Gynecological Disorders


       
1.  Female Sexual Arousal Disorder (FSAD)
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about evaluating FSAD, including
definition of FSAD
requesting examinations for FSAD claims
within scope determinations for FSAD
evaluating FSAD, and
considering special monthly compensation (SMC) associated with FSAD.

Change Date

May 19, 2020

V.iii.8.A.1.a.Definition:  FSAD

Female Sexual Arousal Disorder (FSAD) refers to the continual or recurrent physical inability of a woman to accomplish or maintain an ample lubrication-swelling reaction during sexual intercourse.  Decreased blood flow to the genital area is believed to contribute to FSAD similar to the role of vascular disease in male erectile dysfunction.  Other causes may include nerve and/or tissue damage.
Important: 
FSAD is a physical disorder characterized by physiological findings/damage to the gynecological system.  It is not a psychiatric condition found in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, fifth version (DSM-5) for mental disorders.  DSM-5 does include a diagnosis of female sexual interest/arousal disorder, which is a different disorder and is not synonymous with FSAD.
A diagnosis of FSAD cannot be rendered or confirmed by a mental health examiner.  When a mental health examination or mental health treatment records suggest a diagnosis of FSAD, including FSAD secondary to medication for a psychiatric disorder, the diagnosis must be confirmed in other medical evidence by a qualified medical professional. 

V.iii.8.A.1.b.Requesting Examinations for FSAD Claims

Use the Gynecological Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire when a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) examination is necessary to assist in substantiating a claim of FSAD or other female sexual dysfunction. 
 
Notes: 
If the Veteran claims service connection (SC) for FSAD or other sexual dysfunction and the exam threshold described in 38 CFR 3.159(c)(4) is met, request the examination using the Gynecological Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire.
The Gynecological Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire includes a specific section concerning FSAD that includes a request for the examiner to identify whether
the Veteran has FSAD, and
FSAD, if present, is at least as likely as not attributable to another condition.
In all cases, if an examiner diagnoses FSAD, the Gynecological Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire must be completed, or sufficient alternative evidence (such as private medical evidence submitted in lieu of an examination) must be of record.
When a claimed gynecological issue is examined using an examination other than the Gynecological Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire, such as an examination of scars following cesarean section using the Scars/Disfigurement Disability Benefits Questionnaire, also request the Gynecological Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire to evaluate the underlying gynecological issue, including FSAD.

V.iii.8.A.1.c.  Within Scope Determinations for FSAD

If SC for FSAD is not expressly claimed, consider FSAD within scope of the claim in the circumstances described in the table below. 
 
When ...
Then consider FSAD within scope of the ...
the Gynecological Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaireindicates that FSAD is attributable to the claimed gynecological disorder
claimed gynecological disorder. 
 
Note:  When a gynecological disorder is claimed, the examiner must address whether FSAD is present and if it is related to the claimed gynecological disorder as noted in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.1.b.
a mental health examination indicates a diagnosis of FSAD is present and provides possible nexus information linking it to medication or treatment for a mental health disorder
claimed mental health condition.
 
Note:  The diagnosis of FSAD must be confirmed by an appropriate non-mental health examiner.  Analyze the evidence of record to determine whether the criteria under 38 CFR 3.159(c)(4) are satisfied to request further examination of FSAD.
other evidence submitted with the claim leads to a within scope determination for FSAD as described at M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c
claimed condition.


V.iii.8.A.1.d.Evaluating FSAD 

When the requirements are met, SC for FSAD will be awarded as a stand-alone gynecological disability using 38 CFR 4.116, diagnostic code (DC) 7632 with a 0-percent evaluation.  This is the maximum evaluation available for FSAD.
 
Note:  The original clarification that FSAD is a disorder subject to SC was not a regulatory change.  Consequently, the provisions of 38 CFR 3.114 do not apply for assignment of the effective date.  Subsequent updates to 38 CFR 4.116, including the addition of DC 7632 for FSAD, effective May 13, 2018, are, similarly, not liberalizing. 

V.iii.8.A.1.e.  Considering SMC Associated With FSAD

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) must be considered in FSAD cases.  SMC (k) for loss of use (LOU) of a creative organ will be inferred and awarded whenever SC for FSAD is granted.
 
Note:  If SC was previously established for FSAD but SMC was not awarded, place entitlement to SMC at issue and grant.  The effective date for the award of SMC will be the date SC for FSAD was established.

2.  Other Gynecological Disorders
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about evaluating other gynecological disorders, including
SC for disorders of menstruation
evaluating pelvic organ prolapse
malignant neoplasms of the gynecological system
disfigurement due to benign or malignant neoplasms
cervical dysplasia
human papillomavirus (HPV)
changes in the rating schedule for gynecological conditions and disorders of the breast, and
infertility.

Change Date

September 30, 2025

V.iii.8.A.2.a.  SC for Disorders of Menstruation

A disease or injury resulting in ovarian dysfunction affecting the menstrual cycle, such as dysmenorrhea and secondary amenorrhea, can be service-connected (SC).  Evaluate using 38 CFR 4.116, DC 7615.
 
Notes:  
SC cannot be established for primary amenorrhea or dysmenorrhea.  By definition, neither disorder would be incurred in or aggravated by service. 
SC can be established for secondary amenorrhea or dysmenorrhea when the evidence shows that the diagnosis is due to an ovarian disability or any other female reproductive organ disorder or other SC disability. 

V.iii.8.A.2.b.  Evaluating Pelvic Organ Prolapse

Apply the principles below to evaluate pelvic organ prolapse. 
Do not assign multiple evaluations under 38 CFR 4.116, DC 7621 for prolapse of multiple pelvic organs.
When prolapse is incomplete or complete, assign a 10-percent evaluation.  In addition, evaluate residual disabilities or symptoms under the corresponding DC and combine, as usual, under 38 CFR 4.25.
Example:  SC is warranted for pelvic organ prolapse.  Examination shows that, as a result of complete prolapse, the Veteran also experiences urinary incontinence requiring the wearing of absorbent materials that must be changed twice daily, impairment of sphincter control resulting in slight leakage, and localized dermatitis affecting less than five percent of body area that is treated with topical therapy.  The following evaluations will be established for the pelvic organ prolapse and residuals:
38 CFR 4.116, DC 7621, 10 percent, pelvic organ prolapse
38 CFR 4.115b, DC 7517, 20 percent, urinary incontinence due to pelvic organ prolapse
38 CFR 4.114, DC 7332, 10 percent, impairment of sphincter control due to pelvic organ prolapse, and
38 CFR 4.118, DC 7806, 0 percent, dermatitis due to pelvic organ prolapse.
Note:  Prior to the changes to 38 CFR 4.116, effective May 13, 2018, these conditions were evaluated under 38 CFR 4.116, DC 7621 to 7623. 
 
References:  For more information on
effective dates for decisions impacted by regulatory changes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6, and
protection of evaluations based on a change in diagnostic criteria, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 1.B.4.

V.iii.8.A.2.c.  Malignant Neoplasms of the Gynecological System

Separate 100-percent evaluations will be assigned for both active gynecological cancer and active breast cancer.  Metastasis of a gynecological cancer or breast cancer to a different body system will also be evaluated separately. 
 
Consider corresponding entitlement to SMC. 
 
References:  For more information on
temporary total evaluations for cancers, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.D.3.e
evaluating malignant neoplasms and associated impairments, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.5.a and b, and
entitlement to SMC (k) for anatomical loss of a creative organ, see
38 CFR 3.350(a), and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.d.  

V.iii.8.A.2.d.  Disfigurement Due to Benign or Malignant Neoplasms 

Do not evaluate disfigurement due to benign or malignant neoplasms of the gynecological system analogous to 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800.  DC 7800 is for evaluation of disfigurement of the head, face, or neck only.  

V.iii.8.A.2.e.Cervical Dysplasia

Do not routinely award SC for cervical dysplasia, also referred to as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN).  Cervical dysplasia/CIN is not a disease or injury.  It is a cellular abnormality of the cervix revealed by Papanicolaou (Pap) smear testing that generally resolves without treatment or residuals.  In these cases, there is an abnormal laboratory finding but no disability, and SC is not warranted. 
SC may be warranted if cervical dysplasia/CIN
requires treatment that leaves residuals, or
is linked to the subsequent development of cervical cancer. 
Use the table below to determine the appropriate actions to take when SC is claimed following an in-service confirmed finding of cervical dysplasia/CIN.
If medical evidence shows the subsequent development of …
Then award SC for …
Additional Information to Consider
chronic or severe dysplasia/CIN requiring treatment, and
chronic residuals of the required treatment
residuals of cervical dysplasia/CIN.
Common procedures for treatment of chronic or severe dysplasia/CIN include
cauterization
laser surgery
cryosurgery, or
loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP).
cervical cancer, and
a link between the in-service dysplasia/CIN and the cancer
cervical cancer and/or residuals.
In-service cervical dysplasia that resolved without residuals is less likely to be related to later-developing cervical cancer.  However, these cases require a medical opinion to determine whether a relationship exists between the conditions.
Note:  Cervical dysplasia is often associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection.  There are over 60 types of HPV infection, and only certain types are associated with high-grade cervical dysplasia and cancer. 

V.iii.8.A.2.f.  HPV

Do not routinely award SC for HPV infection.  Usually, HPV infections are asymptomatic and identified only as a finding on a Pap smear.  Most resolve spontaneously without residuals requiring only periodic pap smears for follow-up.  In these cases, there is an abnormal laboratory finding but no disability, and SC is not warranted. 
SC may be warranted if a disability develops as a result of an in-service HPV infection.  Two circumstances that may warrant SC are
genital warts that are shown in service or by nexus to be associated with the HPV infection, and
HPV resulting in persistent infection that progresses to cervical dysplasia and subsequently to cervical cancer.
Important:  A medical nexus is required to establish an association between genital warts and in-service HPV infection or between cervical cancer and in-service HPV infection. 
Note:  There are multiple varieties of HPV infection which can cause common warts, plantar warts, and other findings.  HPV is not limited to sexual transmission.
References:  For more information on considering claims for SC associated with sexually transmitted diseases, see 
38 CFR 3.301(c)(1), and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7.5.a.

V.iii.8.A.2.g.  Changes in the Rating Schedule for Gynecological Conditions and Disorders of the Breast

The rating criteria for gynecological conditions and disorders of the breast have undergone historical changes.  Recent full-scale historical revisions were effective on the following dates: 
May 13, 2018, and
May 22, 1995.
Note:  These changes in the rating criteria
are not considered liberalizing, and
should not be the basis for a reduction in disability rating unless medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved. 

V.iii.8.A.2.h.  Infertility

Infertility, as defined in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.4.a, can be a symptom or consequence of injury or disease.  If a Veteran claims SC for infertility, rate the underlying injury or disease under the appropriate DC.  Do not establish SC for infertility itself.  
SMC due to anatomical loss or loss of use of a creative organ is warranted when an SC condition results in infertility.
References:  For more information on
claims involving contentions of infertility, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.4
FSAD, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.1.e
disorders of menstruation, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.2.a
malignant neoplasms of the gynecological system, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A.2.c
elective procedures involving the reproductive system, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.C.1.c, and
entitlement to SMC (k) for anatomical loss or LOU of a creative organ, see
38 CFR 3.350(a)
38 CFR 4.116, Note 2, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.a-d.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 8, Section B - Disabilities of the Breast
Article ID: 554400000180879
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the topic "Disabilities of the Breast."

       
1.  Disabilities of the Breast
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about evaluating disabilities of the breast, including
malignant neoplasms of the breast 
disfigurement due to benign or malignant neoplasms 
fibrocystic breast disease
elective breast surgery, and
gynecomastia.

Change Date

May 14, 2018

V.iii.8.B.1.a.  Malignant Neoplasms of the Breast 

Malignant neoplasms of male or female breast tissue (38 CFR 4.116, diagnostic code (DC) 7630) are evaluated at 100 percent for active cancer. 
 
For female Veterans, consider corresponding entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC).
 
Important:  Separate 100-percent evaluations will be assigned for both active gynecological cancer and active breast cancer.  Metastasis of a gynecological cancer or breast cancer to a different body system will also be evaluated separately. 
 
References:  For more information on
temporary total evaluations for cancers, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.D.3.e
evaluating malignant neoplasms and associated impairments, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.5.a and b, and
considering SMC (k) due to loss of breast tissue, see
38 CFR 3.350(a), and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.k.

V.iii.8.B.1.b.  Disfigurement Due to Benign or Malignant Neoplasms 

Do not evaluate disfigurement due to benign or malignant neoplasms of the breast analogous to 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800 unless there is actual disfigurement of the head, face, or neck.  DC 7800 is for evaluation of disfigurement of the head, face, or neck only.  

V.iii.8.B.1.c.  Fibrocystic Breast Disease

Do not routinely award service connection (SC) for fibrocystic breast disease.  Although this condition is termed a disease, it is actually a physiologic finding that is generally acute and transient.  In the absence of associated pathology, SC is not warranted.  Additionally, fibrocystic breasts are not associated with increased risk of breast cancer unless the changes are associated with atypical hyperplasia.
Examples of associated pathology that may warrant SC for fibrocystic breast disease are
persistent lumps or thickening requiring surgical excision, or
fibrocystic breast changes with associated atypical hyperplasia.
Use the table below to determine when SC for pathology associated with claimed fibrocystic breast disease is warranted as well as the proper DC to use in the evaluation.
If the service treatment records show …
And medical evidence shows …
Then award SC for … 
fibrocystic breasts
continuous symptoms and/or nexus to subsequent post-service excision of persistent lumps or thickening
residuals of surgery under appropriate DCs including
the 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800series for scars, and
38 CFR 4.116, DC 7626 for breast, surgery of.
fibrocystic breasts
the (in-service or post-service) development of atypical hyperplasia associated with the fibrocystic breasts
subsequent development of breast cancer, and
nexus between the fibrocystic breasts with associated atypical hyperplasia and the development of breast cancer
breast cancer and/or residuals under appropriate DCs including
38 CFR 4.116, DC 7627, or
38 CFR 4.116, DC 7626.


V.iii.8.B.1.d.  Elective Breast Surgery

Breast surgeries that are not medically necessitated, such as reduction mammoplasty for cosmetic purposes and any expected residual effects thereof, are not subject to SC. Such procedures are considered elective surgeries and therefore do not meet the provisions of a disease or injury incurred coincident with service.
Important:  If reduction mammoplasty is recommended to alleviate physical discomfort, such as back, shoulder, or neck pain, SC should be considered on the basis of aggravation only, and if so established, SMC (k) would be payable if the resultant tissue loss meets the requirements of the statute.
References:  For more information about
principles relating to SC, see
38 CFR 3.303, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A
aggravation of pre-service disability, see
38 CFR 3.306, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.C, and
entitlement to SMC (k), see
38 CFR 3.350(a), and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.4.

V.iii.8.B.1.e.  Gynecomastia

SC may be established for gynecomastia when the evidence shows that it was incurred in or caused by military service.  However, consideration must be given to whether there is clear evidence that the condition existed prior to service.
 
Evaluate gynecomastia depending on symptoms and/or pre- or post-surgical resection status under 
38 CFR 4.116, DC 7626
38 CFR. 4.116, DC 7631, or
38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804/7805.
Note:  Under 38 CFR 4.116, DC 7626, no more than a noncompensable evaluation can be assigned as there is no significant alteration in size or form since the removal of excess tissue results in a return to breast size within normal limits for a human male. 

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 9 - Hematologic and Lymphatic Systems
Article ID: 554400000180513
Updated Sep 15, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1 
Sickle Cell Disease
2
Other Hematologic and Lymphatic Conditions


  
1.  Sickle Cell Disease
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about hemic and lymphatic conditions, including
definition of 
sickle cell disease, and
sickle cell anemia
inheritance of 
sickle cell trait, and
sickle cell anemia
characteristics of sickle cell anemia, and
mechanism of inheritance of sickle hemoglobin.

Change Date

June 14, 2019

V.iii.9.1.a.Definition:  Sickle Cell Disease

Sickle cell disease is a generic term for all disorders characterized by the presence of sickle hemoglobin in the red blood cells and includes
sickle cell anemia
sickle cell trait, and
other hemoglobinopathies such as 
sickle cell thalassemia, and
sickle-hemoglobin C disease. 
Notes:  
The phenomenon of sickling of red blood cells is a hereditary abnormality that of itself usually produces few ill effects.
Sickle cell trait alone is generally not a ratable disability, as provided in 38 CFR 4.117, diagnostic code (DC) 7714.

V.iii.9.1.b.Definition: Sickle Cell Disease
 

Sickle cell anemia is a hereditary and familial disorder characterized clinically by symptoms of
anemia
arthritis
leg ulcers, and
acute attacks of pain. 
Note:  The age of onset is generally early childhood. 

V.iii.9.1.c.Inheritance of Sickle Cell Trait

Inheritance of sickle cell trait may be from one or both parents.
If sickle hemoglobin is inherited from one parent and normal hemoglobin from the other, the combination is referred to as sickle cell trait. 
Note:  Except for unusual circumstances, this is a benign asymptomatic condition and is not associated with increased morbidity.

V.iii.9.1.d.Inheritance of Sickle Cell Anemia

The inheritance of sickle hemoglobin from each parent results in sickle cell anemia.
Sickle cell anemia is usually accompanied by
moderate to severe anemia, and
appropriate clinical signs and symptoms, such as 
enlargement of the heart
abnormalities of the musculoskeletal system
bone and joint pain, and/or
fever.

V.iii.9.1.e.Characteristics of Sickle Cell Anemia

Sickle cell anemia is a morbid state characterized by hemolytic anemia and the following manifestations
the presence of peculiar sickle-shaped, or oat-shaped, red blood cells
signs of excessive blood destruction and active blood formation, and
repeated vaso-occlusive episodes.

V.iii.9.1.f.Mechanism of Inheritance of Sickle Hemoglobin

The presence of sickle hemoglobin, a variant of the normal hemoglobin in human red blood cells, is subject to the usual mechanisms of biologic inheritance.

  2.  Other Hematologic and Lymphatic Conditions
  

Introduction

This topic contains information about hemic and lymphatic conditions, including
assigning a permanent and total (P&T) evaluation for amyloid light chains (AL) amyloidosis (primary amyloidosis)
review examinations of non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (NHL) and other persistent cancers
pyramiding of NHL and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
evaluating monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS)
definitions of bone marrow and stem cell transplant
rating schedule update, and
historical P&T evaluations.

Change Date

September 15, 2025

V.iii.9.2.a.Assigning a  P&T Evaluation for AL Amyloidosis

Assign a permanent and total (P&T) evaluation for amyloid light chains (AL) amyloidosis (primary amyloidosis).  AL amyloidosis is considered incurable and progressive.
Notes:
Evaluate AL amyloidosis under 38 CFR 4.117, DC 7717.
Consider ancillary benefits associated with the award of P&T disability evaluations.
AL amyloidosis is a disability that is presumptively associated with herbicide exposure.
References:  For more information on 
rating disabilities associated with herbicide exposure, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.C, and
addressing claims for P&T evaluation based on malignancy prognosis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4.i.

V.iii.9.2.b.Review Examinations of NHL and Other Persistent Cancers

When evaluating the need for a review examination at the two-year period prescribed in the rating schedule under 38 CFR 4.117, DC 7715, following discontinuance of the treatment phase for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) or any other persistent cancer with a high mortality rate, consider that the various therapeutic treatment modalities may continue at intervals greater than the review period indicated in the rating schedule.
 
If the disease has actively persisted for several years, thoroughly examine the medical record to determine whether the disease is
actually in remission, or
still active and being regularly treated over extended periods of time.
Do not schedule a review examination unless the record clearly shows a long-term and stable remission.
 
Important:  Consider assigning a P&T evaluation when a provision under 38 CFR 3.327(b)(2) applies or as otherwise warranted under the provisions of M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4.
 
Reference:  For more information on when not to schedule a review examination, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.d.

V.iii.9.2.c.  Pyramiding of CLL and NHL

Do not assign separate evaluations for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) (38 CFR 4.117, DC 7703) and NHL (38 CFR 4.117, DC 7715).  They are cancers of the same body system and assignment of multiple evaluations would be pyramiding. 
In cases where both cancers are diagnosed, assign the appropriate evaluation using a hyphenated DC.
 
References:  For more information on
pyramiding, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b, and
presumptive service connection (SC) for CLL and NHL, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.C.1.

V.iii.9.2.d.  Evaluating MGUS

Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is an asymptomatic, pre-malignant disorder characterized by monoclonal plasma cell proliferation in the bone marrow and absence of end organ damage.
Evaluate MGUS under 38 CFR 4.117, DC 7712.
Notes: 
MGUS is generally asymptomatic, but it can sometimes present with tingling or numbness in the hands or feet. 
Routine blood tests can lead to MGUS detection.
Important:  MGUS does not have to be compensable to qualify for presumptive SC due to herbicide exposure.
Reference:  For more information on presumptive SC for MGUS based on herbicide exposure, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.A, and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.C.

V.iii.9.2.e.Definition:  Bone Marrow and Stem Cell Transplant

A bone marrow transplant, also called a stem cell transplant, is a procedure used to infuse healthy cells, called stem cells, into the body to replace damaged or diseased bone marrow.  The process of infusing healthy cells into the body to replace diseased tissue may be referred to in a variety of manners based on the donor source and the type of tissue used.  The following procedures all satisfy the criteria for the 100-percent rating under 38 CFR 4.117: 
stem cell transplant
bone marrow transplant
bone marrow stem cell transplant
peripheral blood transplant, and
peripheral blood stem cell transplant.

V.iii.9.2.f.  Rating Schedule Update

The criteria for rating disabilities of the hematologic and lymphatic systems in 38 CFR 4.117 were most recently updated effective 
December 9, 2018, and
October 23, 1995.  
The purpose of these updates was to
incorporate medical advances
update medical terminology
add disabilities not previously included, and
refine rating criteria.
Note:  These updates were not liberalizing changes in the rating criteria. 
 
Reference:  For more information on these and other historical changes to 38 CFR 4.117, see
38 CFR 4, Appendix A
38 CFR 4.117 (Historical), and
the Board of Veterans Appeal Research Tools website for historical 38 CFR 4.117.

V.iii.9.2.g.  Historical P&T Evaluations

Historical policy guidance in existence prior to the December 9, 2018, rating schedule update directed the assignment of P&T evaluations for CLL and multiple myeloma.  P&T evaluations assigned under the prior version of the rating schedule with application of those policies are protected under 38 CFR 3.951(a). 
 
P&T evaluations were directed 
from November 6, 2003, to December 9, 2018, for CLL, with diagnosis being the sole requirement unless the condition was considered cured via treatment with a bone marrow transplant, and
from January 28, 2003, to December 9, 2018, for multiple myeloma unless an exceptional situation was present in which inactive multiple myeloma was documented.
Important:  
In all situations, the evidence of record must be analyzed to determine the treatment plan and prognosis for active malignancy associated with CLL or multiple myeloma.  As directed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4, assign a P&T evaluation for active malignancy when warranted, whether the disability is evaluated under historical or current rating criteria. 
Revisions to 38 CFR 4.117, DCs 7703 and 7712 effective on December 9, 2018, provide criteria for scheduling review examinations for CLL and multiple myeloma unless there is clear evidence establishing a terminal prognosis.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 10 - Skin Conditions
Article ID: 554400000180515
Updated Oct 02, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter

This chapter contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Principles for Rating Skin Disorders and Scars
2
Rating Scars or Other Disfigurement of the Head, Face, or Neck
3
Rating Painful or Unstable Scars
4
Rating Specific Skin Conditions


  
1.  General Principles for Rating Skin Disorders and Scars 

Introduction

This topic contains general principles for rating skin disorders and scars, including
applying alterative rating criteria in evaluating skin conditions
separate evaluations for multiple skin disorders using the general rating formula
separate evaluations using the general rating formula based on
percentage of affected area, and
medication criteria
single evaluations using the general rating formula for multiple skin disorders
systemic therapy such as corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive drugs
exposed body area
application of the bilateral factor for skin conditions to include scarring, and
revisions of the skin rating schedule.

Change Date

November 19, 2018

V.iii.10.1.a.  Applying Alternative Rating Criteria in Evaluating Skin Conditions

When 38 CFR 4.118 offers variable methods to evaluate a skin condition, assign a single evaluation using the criteria that results in the highest rating.
 
Example:  Under 38 CFR 4.118 diagnostic code (DC) 7806, dermatitis is to be rated using the general rating formula for the skin.  Within the general rating formula, skin conditions are rated on either skin involvement/type of treatment or as disfigurement of the head, face, or neck or scars, depending upon the predominant disability.  For examination findings of dermatitis involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body (a 10-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.118 DC 7806) and scarring that is noncompensable under 38 CFR 4.118 DC 7800 through 38 CFR 4.118 DC 7805, a single evaluation of 10 percent is warranted under 38 CFR 4.118 DC 7806.  Assigning an evaluation for dermatitis based on percentage of involvement of the entire body and a separate evaluation based on the residual scarring amounts to pyramiding.
 
Reference:  For more information on avoidance of pyramiding, see 
38 CFR 4.14, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b.

V.iii.10.1.b.Separate Evaluations for Multiple Skin Disorders Using the General Rating Formula

When evaluating separately diagnosed skin conditions and the predominant disability requires evaluation under the general rating formula for the skin, separate evaluations for each diagnosis are permissible when the evaluation is based on disability due solely to the individual diagnosis.
However, when it is most advantageous and allows for maximized benefits, multiple skin disorders evaluated under the same criteria may be assigned a single disability evaluation as discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 10.1.e.

V.iii.10.1.c.Separate Evaluations Using the General Rating Formula Based on Percentage of Affected Area

A Veteran diagnosed with multiple skin conditions may receive separate evaluations using the general rating formula for the skin based on the percentage of exposed areas affected by each skin condition when
separate areas of skin are involved, and
the medical evidence clearly indicates that the percentages affected are due solely to each individual diagnosis.
Example:  The medical evidence clearly indicates that skin condition X alone affects 6 percent of the exposed skin, while skin condition Y alone affects 12 percent of the exposed skin.  The area affected by each skin disability is entirely separate.  In this scenario, separate evaluations may be assigned.
Important:
The evidence must identify which residual disability is due to which individual skin condition.
It may be necessary to request clarification from an examiner to identify the percentage of exposed skin affected only by one skin condition versus the other skin condition.
If an examiner cannot provide separate percentages due solely to each skin condition, separate evaluations cannot be granted using those criteria alone.  If two or more skin conditions involve the same area of skin, assign the highest evaluation based on the combined area of involvement.
This guidance applies equally to evaluations based on the percentage of the entire body affected as well.
Reference:  For more information on assigning a single evaluation for multiple skin disabilities in order to maximize benefits, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 10.1.e.

V.iii.10.1.d.Separate Evaluations Using the General Rating Formula Based on Medication Criteria

If the same medication(s) is/are used to treat each skin condition, separate evaluations may not be assigned unless alternative criteria are used to establish the disability evaluation for the separately evaluated skin condition(s) and separate areas of the skin are affected. 
Example:  The Veteran has dermatitis of the neck involving at least 5 percent but less than 20 percent of exposed body area.  The Veteran also has psoriasis on the knees involving less than 5 percent of total body area.  Both conditions were treated with oral corticosteroids for a period of less than 6 weeks over the past 12-month period.  Separate 10-percent disability evaluations may be assigned.  Assign a 10-percent evaluation for dermatitis based on exposed area affected and a separate 10-percent evaluation for psoriasis treated with oral steroids.
 
Important:  The decision maker should assign separate evaluations in a manner that provides the most advantageous rating for the Veteran.

V.iii.10.1.e.  Single Evaluations Using the General Rating Formula for Multiple Skin Disorders

A Veteran diagnosed with multiple skin conditions that are evaluated using the general rating formula for the skin based on the percentage of total body area or exposed areas affected may receive a single evaluation when
evaluating the disabilities together allows for maximization of benefits, or
the symptoms of, and/or area affected by, the multiple disabilities cannot be separated, as is directed by 38 CFR 4.14. 
Example 1:  A Veteran has service-connected (SC) dermatitis that affects areas of the arms, covering 10 percent of the entire body area.  The Veteran also has SC tinea corporis affecting the groin and upper legs, covering 10 percent of the entire body area.  Different topical medications are used to treat each disability.  Evaluated individually, each skin disorder warrants a separate 10-percent evaluation under the general rating formula for the skin.  As the disabilities combine to affect a total 20 percent of the entire body and do not affect the same area of the body, a single 30-percent evaluation for dermatitis and tinea corporis may be assigned under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7806-7813.  In this case, the single evaluation is assigned to maximize benefits since assignment of separate 10-percent evaluations would be a lesser benefit.
 
Example 2:  A Veteran has SC dermatitis and eczema.  Both disabilities affect the hands, covering a total of 3 percent of exposed body area.  The examiner is unable to differentiate the percent of body area affected by each disorder.  The same topical treatment is used for both conditions.  A single 0-percent disability evaluation must be assigned since the evaluation of the same manifestation under different diagnoses must be avoided. 
 
Notes: 
When the Veteran has multiple SC skin disorders and maximization of benefits via assignment of a single evaluation appears possible but the examination results do not provide the specific measurements of affected body area, request clarification to determine the actual percentage of body area affected. 
When analysis shows that benefits maximization is possible with the assignment of a single disability evaluation, enter the disabilities as a single disorder in the Evaluation Builder.  For example, using the facts from Example 1 above, choose the predominant diagnosis and enter the single 20-percent finding for the percentage of body area affected.  This Evaluation Builder workaround must be utilized until updates are made for this functionality. 

V.iii.10.1.f.  Systemic Therapy Such as Corticosteroids or Other Immunosuppressive Drugs

The term systemic therapy that is contained in the general rating formula for the skin and in certain additional DCs under 38 CFR 4.118 refers to treatment that is administered through any route (orally, injection, suppository, intranasally) other than the skin.  Medications that are applied topically (directly to the skin), including topical corticosteroids or immunosuppressives, are not considered systemic for Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) purposes.
Notes:  
When there is a question as to whether drug treatment is systemic therapy for rating purposes, request clarification from a VA or other licensed medical professional.
The changes to 38 CFR 4.118 effective August 13, 2018, preclude any consideration of topical therapy as systemic therapy, irrespective of the extent of application to the body.
For claims filed prior to August 13, 2018, where the skin condition is evaluated under the historical 38 CFR 4.118, medications that are applied topically (directly to the skin), including topical corticosteroids or immunosuppressives, are generally not considered systemic for VA purposes.  Under the historical rating criteria, a topical corticosteroid may only be considered systemic therapy where it is administered on such a large scale over the body that it affects the body as a whole. 
If the evidence suggests that a skin disability is treated so extensively with a topical corticosteroid that it may be consistent with systemic therapy, refer the case to an appropriate dermatology specialist for an opinion addressing whether the topical corticosteroid is used so extensively on the body that it may be considered systemic therapy.
If the matter cannot be resolved after obtaining the medical opinion, refer the case to Compensation Service for an advisory opinion.
Example:  A Veteran is SC for dermatitis herpetiformis.  Medical evidence shows she was treated with oral Dapsone for 7 weeks during the past 12-month period.  An evaluation of 30 percent is warranted for treatment with systemic therapy for a total duration of six weeks or more, but not constantly, during the past 12-month period.
References:  For more information on  
the meaning of “such as” in the rating schedule, see Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet.App. 436 (2002), and
determining whether topical corticosteroids can be considered systemic under historical rating criteria, see 
Johnson v. Shulkin, 862 F.3d 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2017), and
Burton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet.App. 286 (2018), and 
requesting advisory opinions, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.A.2.

V.iii.10.1.g.  Exposed Body Area

When evaluating disabilities under 38 CFR 4.118, exposed areas as referenced in evaluation criteria refer to the face, neck, and hands. 

V.iii.10.1.h.  Application of the Bilateral Factor to Evaluations for Skin Conditions to Include Scarring

The bilateral factor under 38 CFR 4.26 only applies to skin conditions rated based on the skin evaluation criteria under 38 CFR 4.118, DCs 7801 or 7802 as the evaluation criteria and notes provided by these DCs specifically address entitlement to separate evaluations for multiple extremity involvement.  The bilateral factor may also be for application for conditions rated under a DC with evaluation criteria not considering skin involvement (such as when the predominant disability is that pertaining to musculoskeletal impairment).  Do not apply the bilateral factor to DCs for skin conditions to include scars that are
based on whole-body involvement
based on number of debilitating episodes, or
specific to the head, face, and/or neck. 
Examples: 
The bilateral factor is not for application to 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804 as painful or unstable scars are not evaluated separately under this DC.
For ratings based on malignant skin neoplasms under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7818, the bilateral factor is not for application when assigning a 100-percent evaluation for active malignancy/treatment for six months following cessation.  However, when evaluating based on residuals following the six-month period, the bilateral factor may or may not apply depending on whether the residual is being evaluated based on a qualifying DC.

V.iii.10.1.i.  Revisions of the Skin Rating Schedule

Regulatory revisions to the rating schedule are generally not liberalizing, including those revisions to 38 CFR 4.118 effective October 23, 2008, and August 13, 2018.  38 CFR 3.114(a) does not apply because the regulatory revision did not characterize the change as a liberalizing change of law or VA issue. 
 
Reference:  For more information on assigning effective dates based on regulatory updates to the rating schedule, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.

  
2.  Rating Scars or Other Disfigurement of the Head, Face, or Neck
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on rating scars or other disfigurement of the head, face, or neck, including
considering color photographs in evaluating scars or other disfigurement
evaluating 
multiple scars, and
tissue loss of the auricle, anatomical loss of the eye, and other disabling effects, and
whether scars or disfigurement of the head, face, or neck are part of the claim.

Change Date

August 13, 2018

V.iii.10.2.a.  Considering Color Photographs in Evaluating Scars or Other Disfigurement

When an examination report indicates that photographs have been taken of a scar or skin condition, consider the photographs when evaluating the condition. 
 
Reference:  For more information on procedures for handling photographs associated with skin and scars examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.B.1.k.

V.iii.10.2.b.  Evaluating Multiple Scars

Scars of the head, face, or neck are evaluated based on characteristics of disfigurement.  For all characteristics of disfigurement included in 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800 that are evaluated based on size of area affected, the area affected by multiple scars may be added together to meet the total area criteria for the characteristic of disfigurement.  The characteristics of disfigurement criteria that can be met by adding the area affected by multiple scars include
length
hypo- or hyper-pigmentation
abnormal skin texture
absence of underlying soft tissue, and
induration or inflexibility. 
Exception:  Multiple scars may not be added together to meet the width of scarring requirement.
 
Examples: 
Two scars, one measuring two inches in length and the other measuring three inches in length, may be combined to meet the requirement of a scar five inches or more in length to qualify as a characteristic of disfigurement. 
In contrast, two scars, one measuring 0.13 inches in width and the other measuring 0.12 inches in width, may not be combined to meet the requirement of a scar at least one-quarter inch wide at the widest part.
References:  For more information on evaluating 
multiple painful or unstable scars, see 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804, and
multiple burn or other scars not of the head, face, or neck, see
38 CFR 4.118, DC 7801, Notes 1 and 2, and
38 CFR 4.118, DC 7802, Notes 1 and 2. 

V.iii.10.2.c.  Evaluating Tissue Loss of the Auricle, Anatomical Loss of the Eye, and Other Disabling Effects

Evaluate tissue loss of the auricle under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6207 and anatomical loss of the eye under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6061 or 6063, as appropriate.
When the evidence of record shows disabling effects other than disfigurement, such as pain, instability, or muscle/nerve injury, separately evaluate under the appropriate DC based on the functional impairment shown by the record.
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating scars and what qualifies as a characteristic of disfigurement, see 38 CFR 4.118.

V.iii.10.2.d.Whether Scars or Disfigurement of the Head, Face, or Neck Are Part of the Claim

If a scar or other disfigurement of the head, face, or neck is noted on VA examination or in other evidence of record but has not been expressly claimed, whether to put it at issue and decide it as part of the claim depends on whether the scar is considered within scope of the pending claim. 
 
References:  For more information on
within-scope determinations, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.c, and
soliciting a claim for unclaimed chronic disabilities shown by the evidence, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2.

 
 
3.  Rating Painful or Unstable Scars
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on rating painful or unstable scars, including
assigning a separate disability evaluation for functional impairment due to a painful scar
objective evidence of a painful scar
definition of an unstable scar
evaluating unstable and painful scars, and
whether painful or unstable scars are part of the claim. 

Change Date

August 13, 2018

V.iii.10.3.a.  Assigning a Separate Disability Evaluation for Functional Impairment Due to a Painful Scar

A separate disability evaluation for a painful scar under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804may be assigned when the evidence demonstrates functional impairment that
is distinct and separate from the functional impairment addressed by another DC, and
is not duplicative of or overlapping with the symptomatology addressed under another DC. 
Example:  A separate 10-percent evaluation for disfigurement under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800 may be assigned in addition to a 10-percent evaluation for painful scars under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804 and a 10-percent evaluation for facial injury interfering with mastication under 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5325 as each evaluation is based on distinct and separate functional impairment and, therefore, provisions related to pyramiding are not violated.
 
Note:  An evaluation under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7800 is entirely cosmetic in nature.
 
References:  For more information on
assigning a separate disability evaluation for functional impairment due to a painful scar, see Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994)
evaluating scars in the presence of muscle injuries, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.h, and
pyramiding, see
38 CFR 4.14, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b.

V.iii.10.3.b.  Objective Evidence of a Painful Scar

Under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804, an evaluation of 10 percent is assigned for one or two scars that are unstable or painful.
  
Do not establish a compensable evaluation for a painful scar unless there is some objective indication supporting subjective reports of pain or tenderness.
The physical examination section (for the trunk/extremities or the head/face/neck, as applicable) of the Scars/Disfigurement Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) asks the examiner if scars are tender to palpation and, if yes, to check the box.  If the examiner checks that a scar is tender to palpation, consider pain to be objectively demonstrated.
 
Example:  On VA examination, the Veteran gave a history of a painful scar of the trunk.  On the DBQ, in the physical examination of the trunk and extremities, the examiner checked that the trunk scar was tender to palpation.  Accept that the scar is objectively painful.
Example:  On VA examination, the Veteran gave a history of a painful scar of the left arm.  On the DBQ, in the physical examination of the trunk and extremities, the examiner did not check that the scar was tender to palpation.  Do not accept that the scar is objectively painful.

V.iii.10.3.c.  Definition:  Unstable Scar

An unstable scar is a scar in which, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar. 
 
Reference:  For more information on unstable scars, see 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804.

V.iii.10.3.d.  Evaluating Unstable and Painful Scars

When a scar is both unstable and painful, add 10 percent to the evaluation that would otherwise be assigned based on the total number of unstable or painful scars under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804.
 
Example:  If a VA examination notes one right knee arthroscopy scar that is described as unstable and painful, the proper evaluation based on the painful and unstable scar is 20 percent.  Under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7804, one painful scar is entitled to an evaluation of 10 percent.  Since the painful scar is also noted to be unstable, an additional 10 percent is added to that evaluation to arrive at an overall evaluation of 20 percent.

V.iii.10.3.e.Whether Painful or Unstable Scars Are Part of the Claim

If a painful or unstable scar is noted on VA examination or in other evidence of record but has not been expressly claimed, whether to put it at issue and decide it as part of the claim depends on whether the scar is considered within scope of the pending claim. 
 
References:  For more information on
within-scope determinations, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.1.c, and
soliciting a claim for unclaimed chronic disabilities shown by the evidence, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G.2. 

  
4.  Rating Specific Skin Conditions
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on rating specific skin conditions, including
SC for male pattern baldness or androgenetic alopecia
assigning multiple evaluations due to hair loss, and
evaluating mycosis fungoides.

Change Date

November 19, 2018

V.iii.10.4.a. SC for Male Pattern Baldness or Androgenetic Alopecia

Do not grant SC for 
male pattern baldness, or
androgenetic alopecia.  
Note:  VA classifies these conditions as congenital or developmental abnormalities.
 
Important:  While SC is not warranted for alopecia of androgenetic origin, VA recognizes hair loss due to scarring alopecia and alopecia areata under 38 CFR 4.118, DCs 7830 and 7831, as disabilities for which SC is warranted if first manifested in service.
 
Reference:  For more information on congenital or developmental abnormalities, see
38 CFR 4.9, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.E.

V.iii.10.4.b.Assigning Multiple Evaluations Due to Hair Loss

Assign separate evaluations for
complete loss of the eyebrows and eyelashes due to injury, burns, or local disease under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6023
complete loss of the eyelashes due to injury, burns, or local disease under 38 CFR 4.79, DC 6024, and
loss of all body hair due to alopecia areata or an analogous condition under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7831.

V.iii.10.4.c.  Evaluating Mycosis Fungoides

Mycosis fungoides is a cutaneous manifestation of T-cell lymphoma that typically presents as some form of skin lesion and rarely progresses beyond the skin. 
For rating purposes, it is not considered a systemic malignancy.  As such, with the revised skin rating schedule, mycosis fungoides should be evaluated under 38 CFR 4.118, DC 7822. 
If the condition progresses to a lymphoma with appropriate diagnosis, such as Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (active disease/active treatment phase), it would warrant an evaluation under 38 CFR 4.117, DC 7715.
Note:  Prior to the rating schedule change of August 13, 2018, mycosis fungoides was evaluated as either
a skin malignancy if manifestations were cutaneous lesions only and treatment was confined to only
localized topical therapy, or
surgical excision (wide local excision or less extensive excision), or
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma if manifestations were indicative of systemic disease with treatment consistent with systemic malignancy. 
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 11 - Endocrine Conditions
Article ID: 554400000180518
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section   Next Section -->
Overview       
  

In This Chapter
 
This chapter contains the following topics:
 
Topic
Topic Name
1 
Diabetes Mellitus
2
Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
3 
Thyroid Conditions
4 
Examples of Rating Decisions Involving the Complications of Diabetes Mellitus


 
1.  Diabetes Mellitus

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about diabetes mellitus, including
definition of diabetes mellitus
symptoms of diabetes mellitus
evaluating diabetes mellitus
successive criteria requirement for the next higher disability evaluation
information on regulation of activities
scope of diabetes mellitus claims
requesting examinations for diabetes mellitus or diabetic complications 
failure to report in claims for increase in diabetes mellitus, and
effective dates for 
service connection (SC) of diabetes mellitus, and
claims for increase of diabetes mellitus.

Change Date

June 6, 2024

V.iii.11.1.a.  Definition: Diabetes Mellitus
 
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder in which the body is unable to use glucose (a type of sugar obtained from food) effectively.  Hyperglycemia, an abnormally high level of blood sugar, results.
  
Diabetes mellitus is not seriously disabling if, on a diet sufficient to maintain the weight and strength of the claimant, the
blood glucose can be kept within normal limits, and
urine is absent glucose.
As diabetes mellitus progresses
it becomes more difficult to control, even with insulin
complications develop which increase the degree of disability, and
increasing limitation of activity due to unstable blood sugar levels limits employability.

V.iii.11.1.b.  Symptoms of Diabetes Mellitus
 
The cardinal symptoms of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus are
polyuria (excessive urination)
polydipsia (excessive thirst)
polyphagia (excessive hunger)
weakness, and
loss of weight.
The presence of sugar in the urine is characteristic of, but not essential to, a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
  
Notes: 
A diagnosis of diabetes mellitus cannot be made from glycosuria alone, as this may result from
a low renal threshold for sugar, or
excessive ingestion of sugar. 
Persistent hyperglycemia, a blood sugar of 170 milligrams (mg) per 100 cubic centimeters (ccs) blood after 12-hour fast, and glycosuria may be related to
hyperthyroidism
dyspituitarism
pregnancy
apoplexy
cerebral trauma, or
severe infections.

V.iii.11.1.c.  Evaluating Diabetes Mellitus
 

Evaluations of diabetes mellitus are assigned under 38 CFR 4.119, diagnostic code (DC) 7913.  The diagnostic criteria take into account
the means necessary to control diabetes, specifically 
restricted diet
oral hypoglycemic agent
one or more daily injection of insulin, and
regulation of activities
frequency of specific types of care for episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions 
hospitalizations, or
visits to a diabetic care provider
progressive loss of weight and strength, and
diabetic complications.  
Note:  To treat diabetes mellitus, medical providers may prescribe non-insulin injectable medications, such as Ozempic, Victoza, Trulicity, or other generic versions.  These medications are distinctly different from injectable insulin.  Like oral hypoglycemic agents, non-insulin injectable medications help lower blood glucose levels.  For rating purposes, evaluate a prescription for a non-insulin injectable medication in the same manner as a prescription for an oral hypoglycemic agent.  Do not consider a non-insulin injectable medication as equivalent to treatment with insulin. 
References:  For more information on
evaluating complications of diabetes mellitus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2.b, and
scope of diabetes mellitus claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1.f.

V.iii.11.1.d.Successive Criteria Requirement for the Next Higher Disability Evaluation
 
When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign for diabetes mellitus, note that the criteria are successive.  This means the Veteran can only be rated at the next higher disability evaluation when all criteria at the lower disability evaluation are met plus element(s) specific to the higher evaluation are satisfied.
  
References:  For more information on 
diabetes mellitus, see
38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913, and 
Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 360 (2007), and
relationships within evaluation criteria, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.a.

V.iii.11.1.e.Information on Regulation of Activities
 

The term regulation of activities is defined parenthetically in 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913 to mean the requirement of “avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities.”  In turn, this must be understood as meaning that the avoidance is required to help control blood sugar.
  
Voluntary avoidance of strenuous activity by the Veteran, undertaken with the intention of avoiding hypoglycemic episodes, does not meet the regulatory criteria.  Evidence must document that the avoidance of strenuous activities is required/prescribed as part of medical management of the individual’s diabetes.
  
Prescribed or voluntary exercise also does not satisfy the regulation-of-activities criterion.
  
Notes: 
Which specific activities are medically contraindicated as strenuous (what medical restrictions have been prescribed) is a factual medical question. 
The Diabetes Mellitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) requires that the examiner address whether avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities to avoid hypoglycemic episodes is required as part of medical management of diabetes mellitus, and if so, to provide examples. 
The conclusion that “regulation of activities” is demonstrated is an adjudicative determination. 
It is the Department of Veteran’s Affairs (VA’s) policy to concede that an individual’s diabetes mellitus requires insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities when the diabetes has caused episodes of ketoacidosis that have resulted in hospitalization.  

V.iii.11.1.f.   Scope of Diabetes Mellitus Claims

As discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A, determining what issues are within scope of a claim is a case-by-case determination based on a sympathetic reading of the evidence.
 
When reviewing claims for diabetes mellitus, including diabetic complications, consider whether the evidence establishes entitlement to 
an increased evaluation for the
diabetes mellitus, and/or
service-connected (SC) complication(s), and/or
service connection (SC) for expressly claimed or newly discovered, unclaimed complications.
Notes:  
As complications of diabetes mellitus are part of the evaluation criteria for the disease, entitlement to any additional benefits based on complications would be considered within scope of the claim.  
Follow the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c for handling complications of an expressly claimed issue, including when to obtain adequate medical evidence, such as an examination.
References:  For more information on
claim requirements and scope of claim, see 38 CFR 3.155
clarifying issues and claims, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.c, and
addressing unclaimed hypertension as a complication of diabetes mellitus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2.f. 

V.iii.11.1.g.Requesting Examinations for Diabetes Mellitus or Diabetic Complications
 

Refer to the table below for general guidance on determining which examinations to request in claims for diabetes mellitus or diabetic complications. 
   
If the claim wording is interpreted as requesting compensation for ...
Then request ...
diabetes mellitus (initial SC or an increased evaluation) with or without complications specified
the Diabetes Mellitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire, when necessary to decide the claim.
  
Important:
If the Veteran explicitly claims a diabetic complication (new or increased evaluation), or is already SC for a complication(s), include a comment in the examination request to alert the examiner.
The Diabetes Mellitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire must address all diabetic complications present, to include completion of additional DBQs as appropriate.
If the examiner fails to address all diabetic complications and complete all necessary DBQs, the examination must be returned as insufficient.
a specified diabetic complication(s) (new or an increased evaluation)
the specific DBQ(s) associated with the claimed complication(s), when necessary to decide the claim.
  
Note:  Do not request the Diabetes Mellitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire.
  
Important:  Worsening of a diabetic complication could indicate a broader worsening of the diabetes generally.  When worsening in the diabetic process is shown, follow procedures for deciding all issues within scope of the claim as outlined in
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1.f, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c.
 
References:  For more information on 
when an examination is necessary to decide a claim, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A and B, and
developing for a relationship between diabetes mellitus and hypertension, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2.g.

V.iii.11.1.h.Failure to Report in Claims for Increase in Diabetes Mellitus

See the table below for guidance on the correct rating action to take when a claimant fails to report for a necessary VA examination in connection with a claim for increase for diabetes mellitus.
  
If the claim ...
Then ...
is limited to an increase in one or more separately evaluated diabetic complications
deny an increase for the claimed complication(s) based on failure to report for the examination without good cause.
  
Exception:  If the other evidence of record is sufficient to address the evaluation criteria for the claimed complication(s), issue a grant or denial as supported by that evidence.
expressly refers to a reevaluation or increase for diabetes mellitus, whether or not it mentions complications
 
deny
an increase in the evaluation for the diabetic process, and
any expressly claimed diabetic complications.
Exception:  Evaluate the evidence of record in accordance with 38 CFR 3.326 to determine if it is otherwise adequate for rating purposes without a VA examination.  If it is, make a decision based on that evidence.  
 
Reference:  For more information on failure to report for examinations in connection with a claim for an increased evaluation, see 38 CFR 3.655(b).

V.iii.11.1.i.Effective Dates for SC of Diabetes Mellitus

For SC of diabetes, the effective date is generally the later of the date of claim or date entitlement arose.  This includes the effective date for
any evaluation of the diabetic process, and
any separate evaluation of diabetic complications.
Important:  Consider entitlement to an earlier effective date, when applicable, under 38 CFR 3.114 and the Nehmer stipulation.
  
References:  For more information on
assignment of effective dates for SC, see 38 CFR 3.400
effective dates for diabetic complications, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2.c, and
the Nehmer stipulation, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 2.

V.iii.11.1.j.Effective Dates for Claims for Increase of Diabetes Mellitus

Under 38 CFR 3.400(o), assign increased evaluations of diabetes mellitus from
the date an ascertainable increase in the disability occurred if a complete claim or intent to file a claim is received within one year from such date, otherwise
date of receipt of claim.
 Notes: 
Prior to March 24, 2015, 38 CFR 3.157 was in effect.  Under that regulation, certain records showing treatment could be considered claims for increase.
Effective March 24, 2015, claims must be filed on standard forms and records are no longer treated as claims for increase.
Development of new diabetic complications is evidence of an ascertainable increase in the diabetic process.
References:  For more information on
effective dates for diabetic complications, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2.c
historical treatment of treatment records as claims, see 38 CFR 3.157
informal claims received prior to March 24, 2015, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.H
intent to file, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.A
requests for application, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 2.G, and
how to file a claim, see 38 CFR 3.155.

2.  Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about complications of diabetes mellitus, including
common complications of diabetes mellitus
evaluating complications of diabetes mellitus
effective date for diabetic complications
cardiovascular complications of diabetes mellitus
when evidence supports that hypertension is or is not a complication of diabetes mellitus
addressing unclaimed hypertension as a complication of diabetes mellitus
development on the relationship between diabetes mellitus and hypertension
neurological complications of diabetes mellitus
ophthalmological complications of diabetes mellitus
genitourinary complications of diabetes mellitus
musculoskeletal complications of diabetes mellitus
immune and other miscellaneous complications of diabetes mellitus, and
skin complications of diabetes mellitus.

Change Date

November 29, 2016

V.iii.11.2.a.Common Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
As noted in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1.a, complications are disabilities of various body systems, including but not limited to the following, caused by progression of diabetes:
cardiovascular
neurological
ophthalmological
genitourinary
gynecological
musculoskeletal
immune, and
skin.
Notes:  Once diabetic complications begin, multiple complications are usually considered or involved.
  
Reference:  For more information on scope of claim and examination requirements in claims for diabetes mellitus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1.f and g.

V.iii.11.2.b.Evaluating Complications of Diabetes Mellitus

Per 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913, evaluate compensable complications of diabetes mellitus separately unless they are a part of the criteria used to support a 100-percent evaluation. 
  
Noncompensable complications are considered part of the diabetic process under 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913.
  
Before conceding that a particular disability is a complication of diabetes, ensure that there is medical evidence of record supporting that determination.  In some cases, a particular disability of a body part of system could be a diabetic complication or it could be due to another cause.  For example, neurological symptoms in the lower extremities could represent the common complication diabetic peripheral neuropathy.  However, they could also be due to another etiology such as a spinal injury, peripheral vascular disease or multiple sclerosis.
  
References:  For more information on
examples of rating decisions involving the complications of diabetes mellitus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.4, and
avoidance of pyramiding, see 
38 CFR 4.14, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b.

V.iii.11.2.c.Effective Date for Diabetic Complications
 

Because diabetes mellitus is an endocrine disorder with potential multi-system effects, onset of diabetic complications represents medical progression or worsening of diabetes, and diabetic complications are contemplated in the evaluation criteria under 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913, a claim asserting new complications of SC diabetes is a claim for increase rather than a claim for secondary SC. 
  
Therefore, when assigning effective dates for new diabetic complications, consider effective date provisions applicable to increases, specifically
38 CFR 3.400(o), and
38 CFR 3.157 for periods prior to March 24, 2015. 
References:  For more information on 
effective dates for 
SC diabetes mellitus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1.i, and
increased evaluations for diabetes mellitus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1.j, and
determining the scope of, and examination requirements for, claims for diabetes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1.f and g. 

V.iii.11.2.d.Cardiovascular Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Diabetic cardiovascular complications include, but are not limited to
hypertension
atherosclerosis (used interchangeably with arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease))
peripheral arterial disease
peripheral vascular disease
cardiomyopathy
congestive heart failure, and
stroke (macrovascular complication).
References:  For more information on
cardiovascular complications, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 5, and
38 CFR 4.104, and
macrovascular complications to include stroke, see 38 CFR 4.124(a).

V.iii.11.2.e. When Evidence Supports That Hypertension Is or Is Not a Complication of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Analyze the evidentiary record to determine if it contains evidence specifically addressing whether hypertension is or is not a complication of diabetes mellitus.
  
In the absence of record evidence specifically addressing the question of whether hypertension is related to diabetes mellitus
consider hypertension to be a complication of diabetes mellitus when onset of hypertension occurred after a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus with diabetic nephropathy (The onset of hypertension after diabetes mellitus without diabetic nephropathy is not sufficient.), and 
do not consider hypertension to be a complication of diabetes mellitus when
onset of hypertension was before diabetes mellitus (with or without diabetic nephropathy), and
there has been no change in the treatment of hypertension or increase in blood pressure readings.
Important:  
Evaluate the competency, credibility, and probative value of evidence in line with the principles in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.
The analysis above should be used in determining whether or not to address unclaimed hypertension as a complication of diabetes mellitus and making a decision on the merits of the raised claim as detailed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.2.f.

V.iii.11.2.f.  Addressing Unclaimed Hypertension as a Complication of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Raise and decide whether hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus in the absence of an explicit claim only when the evidence supports a grant.  Do not raise and deny the matter of entitlement to hypertension as a complication of diabetes mellitus when it is not explicitly claimed. 
  
Do not raise the issue simply because the record shows hypertension and diabetes mellitus (even if there is diabetic nephropathy).  This alone is not sufficient to support that hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus.
  
Important:  The policy stated in this block does not prohibit a determination of whether hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus when initial evaluation or reevaluation of diabetes mellitus is within the scope of the claim.  The scope and degree of severity of complications is part of any claim involving evaluation of diabetes mellitus.  However, the issue, unless explicitly claimed, should only be raised if SC may be awarded for hypertension as a complication of diabetes mellitus.

V.iii.11.2.g.Development on the Relationship Between Diabetes Mellitus and Hypertension
 
There are fact patterns where the evidence supports or does not support that hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus.
  
In the context of an explicit claim that hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus or in the context of evaluation of the extent of diabetes mellitus (to include whether there are complications of diabetes mellitus), a medical diagnosis or opinion may be necessary to determine whether hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus. 
  
When there is an explicit claim as discussed above, obtain a medical diagnosis or opinion to determine if hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus in the following fact patterns:
medical evidence shows
hypertension was diagnosed before diabetes mellitus or before diabetic nephropathy, but
there has been a subsequent change in the treatment of hypertension and/or an increase in blood pressure readings thereafter (particularly if this occurred after the onset of diabetic nephropathy), or
medical evidence shows no clear indication as to
when hypertension was diagnosed, or
whether hypertension has worsened since the onset of diabetic nephropathy.
Important:  When there is not an explicit claim that hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus and when hypertension in an initial evaluation or reevaluation of diabetes mellitus is not within the scope of the claim, do not develop for a diagnosis or opinion on whether hypertension is a complication of diabetes mellitus.

V.iii.11.2.h.Neurological Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Diabetic neurological complications affecting the nervous system stem from a disturbance of metabolism or ischemia (inadequate blood supply) to the nerves.  One of the most common disabilities is peripheral neuropathy.  Complications affecting the peripheral nerves can extend from the brain and spinal cord to the muscles, skin, and internal organs.  The table below contains a description of symptoms that can be caused by a peripheral nerve disability.
  
Symptoms of Peripheral Neuropathy
Description
paresthesias
numbness, and
tingling
hyperesthesias
increased sensitivity to touch
hypesthesia (or hypoesthesia)
decreased sensitivity to touch
loss of sensation
lack of feeling
pain
burning
lancinating, or
lightning sensations
dysesthesia
unusual and unpleasant sensation after normal stimulation
muscle weakness
lack of strength
 
Note:  Findings are typically in a stocking-glove distribution.
  
Reference:  For more information on evaluating peripheral nerve disorders, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.

V.iii.11.2.i.Ophthalmological Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Diabetic ophthalmological complications are largely due to blood vessel damage caused by high blood sugars such as leakage (hemorrhage) and/or blood vessel blockage.  The table below contains a description of diabetic eye complications.
  
Diabetic Eye Complications
Description
diabetic retinopathy
impairment or loss of vision due to damage affecting blood vessels of the retina
cataract
clouding or opaqueness of the lens of the eye
glaucoma
increased fluid pressure in the eye, and
causes loss of visual fields due to optic nerve damage
 
Reference:  For more information on ophthalmological complications, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.A, and
38 CFR 4.79.

V.iii.11.2.j.Genitourinary Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Diabetic nephropathy is a common diabetic genitourinary complication of diabetes mellitus and may be rated based on criteria including
renal dysfunction, if renal function is affected
voiding dysfunction, if there is incontinence from autonomic nephropathy
urinary tract infection, if there is chronic pyelonephritis, as appropriate
kidney transplant
hemodialysis, or
nephrectomy. 
Note:  Erectile dysfunction (impotence/retrograde ejaculation) is another common complication of diabetes mellitus.
  
Reference:  For more information on genitourinary complications and potential entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC), see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A
38 CFR 4.115a, and 
38 CFR 4.115b.

V.iii.11.2.k.Musculoskeletal Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Diabetic musculoskeletal complications affect the feet, ankles, bones, extremities, and overall gait.  The table below contains a description of diabetic musculoskeletal complications.
  
Diabetic Musculoskeletal Complications
Description
foot complications
affects muscles, joints, and bones
foot neuropathic ulcers
results from abnormal pressure and lack of sensitivity to pain
leads to callus formation, osteomyelitis, and/or gangrene
abnormalities of gait
sensory ataxia to include loss of balance and poor muscle coordination due to loss of position sense
Charcot joints (neuropathic osteoarthropathy)
degenerative changes
instability, and
possible fragmentation of bones, particularly bones of the feet and ankles
amputations
extremities, or
parts of extremities
 
Reference:  For more information on musculoskeletal disabilities, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1
38 CFR 4.71a, and 
38 CFR 4.73.

V.iii.11.2.l.Immune and Other Miscellaneous Complications of Diabetes Mellitus

Hyperglycemia causes the white blood cells of the immune system to function poorly.  In addition, all of the body's fluids have higher levels of sugar and nutrients, which make them more inviting for bacteria to grow and multiply.  This causes infections to be more serious and difficult to cure.  The table below contains a description of diabetic immune and other miscellaneous complications.
  
Diabetic Immune and Other Miscellaneous Complications
Description
References
malignant external otitis
a bacterial infection in older patients that causes
severe ear pain
necrosis of the external auditory canal, and
fever, and may also cause
paralysis of the facial nerve 
paralysis of other cranial nerves, and osteomyelitis of the base of the skull
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B, and
38 CFR 4.87.
nasopharyngeal mucormycosis
a rare and serious fungal infection, which usually develops during or following an episode of diabetic ketoacidosis
sudden onset with periorbital edema, pain, bloody nasal discharge, and increased lacrimation (tearing), and 
nasal mucosa and underlying tissues become black and necrotic
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 4.A, and 
38 CFR 4.97.
emphysematous cholecystitis
begins as an attack of biliary colic, which rapidly progresses, and 
recognized by x-rays that show gas in or around the gallbladder
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6, and 
38 CFR 4.114.
emphysematous pyelonephritis
begins as an attack of biliary colic, which rapidly progresses, and 
recognized by x-rays that show gas in the kidney area
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7
38 CFR 4.115a, and 
38 CFR 4.115b.
vaginal infection
an inflammation of the vagina that creates discharge, odor, irritation, or itching
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 8.A, and 
38 CFR 4.116.
urinary tract infection
infection in any part of the urinary system including kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra, or 
a burning sensation, abdominal pain, and frequency in urination
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 7
38 CFR 4.115a, and 
38 CFR 4.115b.
oral thrush
a yeast infection of the tongue, inner cheek, lip, or gums
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6, and 
38 CFR 4.114.
moniliasis
yeast infections affecting moist areas of the skin
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 10, and
38 CFR 4.118.
gastroparesis (paralysis of the stomach)
severe delayed gastric emptying (sometimes with dumping syndrome) due to vagus nerve involvement, and possible 
nausea, vomiting, early fullness in the stomach, bloating, abdominal pain, and weight loss
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 6, and 
38 CFR 4.114
 

V.iii.11.2.m. Skin Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Diabetes mellitus may result in skin complications.  The table below contains a description of diabetic skin complications.
  
Diabetic Skin Complications
Description
candida
fungal infection, specifically a yeast infection in moist areas
dermatophytes
a group of three types of fungus causing superficial infections of the skin, hair, and nails
ulcers
sores on the skin to include disintegration of tissue
necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
plaque-like yellow to brown lesions over the anterior tibial surfaces of the legs that may ulcerate
diabetic dermopathy
“shin spots” or small plaques with a raised border, also usually over the anterior tibial surfaces that may also ulcerate
bullosis diabeticorum
blisters spontaneously appearing on the hands or feet that heal in two to five weeks, sometimes with scarring and atrophy
atrophy of fatty tissue or skin thickening
resulting from insulin injections
 
Reference:  For more information on skin disabilities, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 10, and
38 CFR 4.118.

 
3.  Thyroid Conditions
   

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about thyroid conditions, including
definitions of hyper- and hypothyroidism
evaluating thyroid disabilities after the initial diagnosis
rating thyroid enlargement, nontoxic
definition of myxedema, and
changes in the endocrine rating schedule.

Change Date

December 11, 2017

V.iii.11.3.a.  Definitions:  Hyper- and Hypothyroidism
 
Hyperthyroidism (over-active thyroid) is a disorder where the thyroid gland synthesizes or creates excessive amounts of thyroid hormone.
  
Note:  This condition may also be diagnosed as Graves’ disease.
  
Hypothyroidism (under-active thyroid) is a disorder where the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone.

V.iii.11.3.b.  Evaluating Thyroid Disabilities After the Initial Diagnosis
 
When a thyroid DC calls for an initial evaluation, the initial evaluation, by its very nature, is not considered static.  Most symptoms of these conditions are alleviated within the initial period of treatment. 
  
When the rating schedule requires the assignment of an evaluation for a specified period after the initial diagnosis, establish the initial evaluation for any applicable period for which the Veteran is eligible; and thereafter, evaluate based on residuals of the disease in the affected body system(s) as directed by the relevant DC.
  
Notes: 
In cases where the claim is being decided during the initial evaluation period, establish controls for a review exam at the end of that period to determine the appropriate evaluation.
For any complications shown on the review examination, follow the procedures in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.b for awarding benefits for residuals of the primary SC disability.
If treatment for one form of thyroid dysfunction causes a new diagnosis of the other form of thyroid dysfunction, the Veteran is entitled to an initial evaluation for the newly diagnosed thyroid disease. 
References:  For more information on
establishing future exam control, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 1.B
static disabilities, see
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 2.B.2.b, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.4, and
evaluations of thyroid disabilities, see 38 CFR 4.119.

V.iii.11.3.c.  Rating Thyroid Enlargement, Nontoxic
 
In the context of thyroid function, nontoxic means that thyroid function is normal. Because thyroid function is normal, the disabling effects of nontoxic thyroid enlargement are generally either manifest as disfigurement or a result of pressure on adjacent organs (such as trachea, larynx, or esophagus). Evaluate this condition based on one or both of these effects, if present. 
  
Reference: For more information on evaluating thyroid enlargement, nontoxic, see 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7902.

V.iii.11.3.d.  Definition: Myxedema

Myxedema (coma or crisis) is a life-threatening form of hypothyroidism found predominantly in undiagnosed or undertreated individuals that requires inpatient hospitalization for stabilization. 

V.iii.11.3.e.  Changes in the Endocrine Rating Schedule 

On December 10, 2017, VA implemented changes in the rating criteria under 38 CFR 4.119.  These changes should not be the basis of a reduction in a Veteran’s disability rating unless medical evidence establishes that the disability has actually improved.
   
Note:  These changes in the rating criteria are not considered liberalizing.
  
References:  For more information on
the effect of a rating schedule readjustment, see
38 CFR 3.951, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.i, and
applying new rating schedule criteria to increased rating claims, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.m.

4.  Examples of Rating Decisions Involving the Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains three examples of rating decisions involving the complications of diabetes mellitus, including
example 1 of a rating decision involving complications of diabetes mellitus
example 2 of a rating decision involving complications of diabetes mellitus, and
example 3 of a rating decision involving complications of diabetes mellitus.

Change Date

December 13, 2005

V.iii.11.4.a.  Example 1: Rating Decision Involving Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Situation:  The Veteran has noncompensable complications of diabetes mellitus but does not have ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions.
  
Result:  Do not evaluate the diabetes mellitus at 60 percent simply because noncompensable complications are present.  Assign a 40-percent evaluation if there is a requirement of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities.  Include the noncompensable complications under 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913.

V.iii.11.4.b.  Example 2: Rating Decision Involving Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Situation:  The Veteran’s diabetes mellitus is controlled by insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities.  In addition, there is diabetic peripheral neuropathy compensable at 10 percent. 
  
Result:  Rate the diabetes mellitus at 40 percent and separately evaluate the compensable complication of diabetic peripheral neuropathy in accordance with the note under 38 CFR 4.119, DC 7913.

V.iii.11.4.c.  Example 3: Rating Decision Involving Complications of Diabetes Mellitus
 
Situation:  The Veteran underwent a below-the-knee amputation due to complications of diabetes mellitus.  In addition
his diabetes mellitus requires
more than one daily injection of insulin
restricted diet, and
regulation of activities
his episodes of ketoacidosis require weekly visits to the diabetic care provider, but
there is no progressive loss of weight and strength.
Result:  Evaluate the diabetes mellitus at 100 percent and award SMC (k) for anatomical loss of a foot.  Since the below-the-knee amputation is secondary to diabetes mellitus, and is considered a compensable complication (in lieu of progressive loss of weight and strength), to warrant the 100-percent evaluation, it would be pyramiding to assign a separate 40-percent evaluation for the amputation.
  
Note:  If compensable complications are not considered in reaching the 100- percent evaluation, they may be separately evaluated.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A - Neurological Conditions and Convulsive Disorders
Article ID: 554400000180519
Updated May 28, 2025

﻿﻿<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview
  

In This Section

 This section contains the following topics:
 
Topic
Topic Name
1 
General Information on Neurological and Convulsive Disorders
2
Peripheral Nerves
3
Migraine Headaches


 
1.  General Information on Neurological and Convulsive Disorders
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about neurological and convulsive disorders, including
considerations in service connection (SC) for neurological disorders
identifying epilepsy
evaluating progressive spinal muscular atrophy
other organic diseases of the nervous system under 38 CFR 3.309(a)
SC of vertigo, and
requesting examinations for manifestations of central nervous system diseases.

Change Date

February 26, 2025

V.iii.12.A.1.a.  Considerations in SC for Neurological Disorders

See the table below for etiological considerations and manifestations involving specific neurological disorders.
 
When ...
Then ...
considering questions of incurrence or aggravation in service
bear in mind the etiology and clinical course of each separate disease.
considering conditions of infectious origin
consider both the circumstances of infection and the incubation period.
determining aggravation for conditions such as multiple sclerosis (MS), progressive muscular atrophy, and myasthenia gravis
be aware that increased symptomatology over a period of a few months may reflect natural progression of the disease.  Base determinations on the developed medical evidence of record.


V.iii.12.A.1.b.  Identifying Epilepsy

Seizures must be witnessed or verified by a physician to warrant service connection (SC) for epilepsy.  Verification may be by an electroencephalogram (EEG), which measures electrical activity in the brain.
 
A physician does not have to witness an actual seizure before a diagnosis of epilepsy can be accepted for evaluation purposes.  Verification by a physician based upon factors other than observing an actual seizure is sufficient.
 
References:  For more information on
identifying epilepsy, see 38 CFR 4.121, and
psychomotor epilepsy, see 38 CFR 4.122.

V.iii.12.A.1.c.  Evaluating Progressive Spinal Muscular Atrophy

Progressive muscular atrophy, 38 CFR 4.124a, diagnostic code (DC) 8023, refers to progressive spinal muscular atrophy, which is a disease of the spinal cord.
 
Progressive muscular atrophy is subject to presumptive SC under 38 CFR 3.309(a)because it is an organic disease of the nervous system.

V.iii.12.A.1.d.  Other Organic Diseases of the Nervous System Under 38 CFR 3.309(a)

For purposes of establishing presumptive SC for a chronic disease under 38 CFR 3.307, the term other organic diseases of the nervous system in 38 CFR 3.309(a) includes any commonly recognized neurological disease (such as may be found in a valid contemporary medical treatise), which is not otherwise specifically enumerated under 38 CFR 3.309(a).  This includes, but is not limited to, the following conditions:
carpal tunnel syndrome
migraine headaches
sensorineural hearing loss
tinnitus
glaucoma
progressive spinal muscular atrophy
diseases of the cranial nervous system
cranial nerve conditions, and
peripheral nerve conditions, such as peripheral neuropathy.
Important:  If there is uncertainty as to whether or not a claimed disability may be considered as an organic disease of the nervous system for purposes of 38 CFR 3.309(a), send the case to Compensation Service for guidance.
 References:  For more information on 
presumptive SC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.B
referring a claim for an advisory opinion, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.A.2, and
establishing SC for hearing loss and tinnitus, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 2.B.

V.iii.12.A.1.e.   SC of Vertigo

Carefully consider the evidence of record when considering SC for vertigo.  Vertigo is generally considered a symptom of another disability such as traumatic brain injury (TBI), Meniere's disease, vestibular neuritis/labyrinthitis, MS, stroke or tumor.
 
When the disability manifested by vertigo is adequately identified, SC should be established for that diagnosis rather than for "vertigo."  However, SC can be established for "vertigo" in the absence of a known or established underlying etiology if there is
an event in service (such as a nonspecific diagnosis of vertigo in service)
vertigo present post service
a nexus establishing the vertigo post service is connected to the event in service, and
the condition is not associated with any other disease or injury.
References:  For more information on
evaluating vertigo as a symptom of TBI and the prohibition against evaluating vertigo separately from TBI, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.1.i, and
principles related to SC, see
38 CFR 3.303, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.

V.iii.12.A.1.f.  Requesting Examinations for Manifestations of Central Nervous System Diseases  

All manifestations or residuals of a central nervous system disease under 38 CFR 4.124a, DCs 8000-8025, must be examined using only the applicable disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) for the primary or underlying central nervous system disease.  Do not request a different DBQ specifically for any manifestations or residuals, as these are accounted for in the DBQ for the primary or underlying disease.
Note:  This applies in all cases where an examination is needed for such manifestations or residuals, even if the primary or underlying central nervous system disease itself is not at issue in the associated claim.
Exception:  When the disabling manifestation requires a specialist examination, as outlined in M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.1.g, request the specific DBQ for the condition requiring a specialist examination.
Example:  Do not request a Peripheral Nerves Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire for evaluation of extremity tremor and weakness due to Parkinson’s disease.  Request only the Parkinson’s Disease Disability Benefits Questionnaire, which includes an assessment for impairment of the extremities.
References:  For more information on
examination requests, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A
progressive neurological disorders, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.C, and
DBQs, see the DBQ Switchboard. 

 
2.  Peripheral Nerves
    

Introduction

This topic contains information on evaluating peripheral nerves, including
regulations for evaluating peripheral nerves
38 CFR 4.124a guidance on evaluating completely sensory peripheral nerve impairment
assigning level of incomplete paralysis, neuritis, or neuralgia
considering the complete findings when evaluating incomplete paralysis
nerve branches of the lower extremities for which separate evaluations may be assigned
assigning separate evaluations for lower extremity peripheral nerves
determining individual nerves affected in the upper and lower extremities when evaluating disabilities
electromyography (EMG) and other tests for peripheral nerve conditions
applying the amputation rule to peripheral nerve disabilities, and
evaluating restless legs syndrome.

Change Date

April 16, 2020

V.iii.12.A.2.a.Regulations for Evaluating Peripheral Nerves

38 CFR 4.124a, DCs 8510-8730, provides evaluation levels for complete paralysis, incomplete paralysis, neuritis, or neuralgia of peripheral nerves.
 
At the beginning of the DCs for the peripheral nerves, the regulation also states that “incomplete paralysis” anticipates substantially less impaired function than described for complete paralysis of the nerve.  When impairment is wholly sensory, the evaluation should be that specified for the mild, or at most, the moderatedegree of incomplete paralysis for the nerve.
 
The regulations listed below also provide guidance on evaluating peripheral nerves.  
 
38 CFR 4.120 provides that when rating peripheral nerve injuries and residuals consider the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, and/or sensory disturbances.  Attention should be given to the site and character of the injury.
 
38 CFR 4.123 provides several principles relating to peripheral nerves:
Neuritis, characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, is to be rated on the scale provided for injury of the nerve involved under the DCs and evaluations provided in 38 CFR 4.124a.
The maximum evaluation for neuritis is the evaluation provided for severeincomplete paralysis of the affected nerve. 
The maximum evaluation that may be assigned for neuritis not characterized by the organic changes referred to in the regulation
is generally the evaluation level specified for moderateincomplete paralysis of the nerve, but
is the evaluation level specified for moderately severeimpairment when the affected nerve is the sciatic nerve. 
38 CFR 4.124 provides that the maximum evaluation for neuralgia, characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain in the distribution of a nerve, should be the evaluation provided for moderate incomplete paralysis of the nerve under the applicable DC.

V.iii.12.A.2.b.      38 CFR 4.124a Guidance on Evaluating Completely Sensory Peripheral Nerve Impairment

In cases where a peripheral nerve disability is only manifested by sensory impairment, 38 CFR 4.124a directs decision makers to assign the evaluation corresponding with the mild or at most the moderate degree of impairment. 
 
To make a choice between mild and moderate, consider the evidence of record and the following guidelines:
The mild level of evaluation would be more reasonably assigned when sensory symptoms are
recurrent but not continuous
assigned a lower medical grade reflecting less impairment, and/or
affecting a smaller area in the nerve distribution. 
Reserve the moderate level of evaluation for the most significant and disabling cases of sensory-only involvement.  These are cases where the sensory symptoms are
continuous
assigned a higher medical grade reflecting greater impairment, and/or 
affecting a larger area in the nerve distribution. 
Important:  This provision does not mean that if there is any impairment that is non-sensory (or involves a non-sensory component) such as a reflex abnormality, weakness, or muscle atrophy, the disability must be evaluated as greater than moderate.  Significant and widespread sensory impairment may potentially indicate the same or even more disability than a case involving a minimally reduced or increased reflex or minimally reduced strength.
 
References:  For more information on
evaluating wholly sensory manifestations of peripheral nerves, see Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet.App. 376 (2017)
considering the complete findings when evaluating incomplete paralysis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2.d
the importance of fully descriptive examinations and limitations from the disabling condition, see 38 CFR 4.1, and
the importance of coordinating the evaluation with impairment of function based on sufficiently characteristic findings, see 38 CFR 4.21.

V.iii.12.A.2.c.  Assigning Level of Incomplete Paralysis, Neuritis, or Neuralgia

The table below provides general guidelines for each level of incomplete paralysis of the upper and lower peripheral nerves.
 
Degree of Incomplete Paralysis
Description
Mild
As this is the lowest level of evaluation for each nerve, this is the default assigned based on the symptoms, however slight, as long as they were sufficient to support a diagnosis of the peripheral nerve impairment for SC purposes.
In general, look for a disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area.
A very minimal reflex or motor abnormality potentially could also be consistent with mild incomplete paralysis.
Moderate﻿﻿
Moderate is the maximum evaluation reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment (38 CFR 4.124a).  
Symptoms will likely be described by the claimants and medically graded as significantly disabling.
In such cases a larger area in the nerve distribution may be affected by sensory symptoms.
Other sign/symptom combinations that may fall into the moderate category include 
combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or
motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate.
Moderate is also the maximum evaluation that can be assigned for 
neuritis not characterized by organic changes referred to in 38 CFR 4.123, or
neuralgia characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain in the distribution of a nerve (38 CFR 4.124).
Moderately Severe
The moderately severe evaluation level is only applicable for involvement of the sciatic nerve.
This is the maximum rating for sciatic nerve neuritis not characterized by the organic changes specified in 38 CFR 4.123.  
Motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability is expected.  
Atrophy may be present.  However, for marked muscular atrophy see the criteria for a severe evaluation under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8520.
Severe
In general, expect motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability.  
Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases.
For the sciatic nerve (38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8520) marked muscular atrophy is expected.
Even though severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.
Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve (38 CFR 4.123).
 
Notes:
Always consider the specific criteria in the 38 CFR 4.124a DC at issue, as well as the general guidance on neuritis and neuralgia under 38 CFR 4.123 and 38 CFR 4.124.
This guidance also applies to radiculopathy, which is evaluated under a peripheral nerve code.
Separate evaluations may not be assigned when evaluating an upper extremity peripheral nerve disability. See note under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8719.
Reference:  For more information on evaluating peripheral nerves, see the Peripheral Nerve Evaluation Matrix.

V.iii.12.A.2.d.  Considering the Complete Findings When Evaluating Incomplete Paralysis

Evaluation Builder entries must be based upon the complete findings of the DBQ and/or evidentiary record, including
the nerve(s) involved
whether the impairment involves
reduced or elevated sensation to various tests, or abnormal sensations
reduced or hyperactive reflexes
muscle weakness
muscle atrophy, and/or
trophic changes
the amount of area in the nerve distribution affected by symptoms
the frequency of symptoms, and
the grade of any impairments that are identified. 
Do not base the entries solely upon the examiner’s assessment of the level of incomplete paralysis.
 
The examiner’s clinical assessment of the extent of incomplete paralysis, as indicated on the DBQ, may be inconsistent with or appear to contradict the objective findings that are documented in other sections of the DBQ or other evidence of record.
 
Important:  The rating activity, not the examining medical professional, determines whether the overall evidentiary record shows the severity of the condition meets the criteria for a classification of mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe.
 
Example 1:  An examiner assesses the peripheral nerve disability as “mild incomplete paralysis.”  However, the DBQ shows muscle weakness, atrophy, and diminished reflexes, which are clearly demonstrative of more than mild incomplete paralysis.  In this case, the complete evidentiary record shows the condition is more than mild under guidance contained in 38 CFR 4.124 and therefore warrants a higher evaluation.
 
Example 2:  An examiner renders an assessment of “severe incomplete paralysis” when the objective test results are wholly sensory.  Therefore, the condition warrants an evaluation no higher than moderate incomplete paralysis under 38 CFR 4.124a.
 
References:  For more information on
tests for peripheral nerve conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2.h, and
interpretation of examination reports, see 38 CFR 4.2.

V.iii.12.A.2.e.Nerve Branches of the Lower Extremities for Which Separate Evaluations May Be Assigned

The table below lists the five nerve branches of the lower extremities for which separate evaluations may be assigned.  See M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2.ffor rating guidance on assigning separate evaluations for nerve conditions of the lower extremities.
 
To assist in evaluating these nerves, the table below also includes any associated nerves in each branch, corresponding DCs under 38 CFR 4.124a, and the general functions covered by each nerve branch. 
 
Lower Extremity Nerve Branches 
Function
Sciatic
sciatic nerve (DCs 8520, 8620, and 8720)
external popliteal nerve (common peroneal) (DCs 8521, 8621, and 8721)
musculocutaneous nerve (superficial peroneal) (DCs 8522, 8622, and 8722)
anterior tibial nerve (deep peroneal) (DCs 8523, 8623, and 8723)
internal popliteal nerve (tibial) (DCs 8524, 8624, and 8724), and
posterior tibial nerve (DCs 8525, 8625, and 8725).
Foot and leg sensory and motor function of the
buttock
leg
knee
muscles below knee
lower leg
fibula
foot, muscles of foot, sole of foot, plantar flexion, and
toes.
Femoral
anterior crural nerve (femoral) (DCs 8526, 8626, and 8726), and
internal saphenous nerve (DCs 8527, 8627, and 8727).
Thigh and leg sensory and motor function of the
quadriceps muscle, front of thigh
medial calf, and
medial malleolus.
Obturator (DCs 8528, 8628, and 8728)
Motor and sensory function of the
hip and muscles of the hip, and
medial thigh.
External cutaneous nerve of thigh (DCs 8529, 8629, and 8729)
Sensory function of the lateral thigh.
Ilio-inguinal nerve (DCs 8530, 8630, and 8730)
Motor and sensory function of the
lower abdominal wall
thigh
scrotum, and
labia majora.


V.iii.12.A.2.f.  Assigning Separate Evaluations for Lower Extremity Peripheral Nerves

Unlike the upper extremities, separate evaluations of the lower extremities may be assigned for symptoms that are separate and distinct, do not overlap, and are attributed to different lower extremity nerves.  This means that separate evaluations are warranted when symptoms arise from any of the five nerve branches listed in the table in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2.e.
 
If symptoms arise from within the same nerve branch of any of the five individual nerve branches in the lower extremity, assigning separate evaluations for those symptoms are not warranted as this would constitute pyramiding.
 
Example 1:  Separate Evaluations Warranted
A Veteran has severe incomplete paralysis of the common peroneal nerve and mild incomplete paralysis of the femoral nerve.  Assign separate evaluations of 30 percent under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8521 and 10 percent under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8526.
 
Analysis:  The common peroneal nerve is part of the sciatic branch and the femoral nerve is part of the femoral branch.  The functions for these branches are separate and distinct and therefore warrant separate evaluations.
 
Example 2:  Separate Evaluations Not Warranted
A Veteran has severe incomplete paralysis of the common peroneal nerve under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8521 and moderate incomplete paralysis of the tibial nerveunder 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8524.  In this case, a single 30-percent evaluation is assigned under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8521.
 
Analysis:  Both of these nerves are part of the same sciatic branch, and therefore the functions associated with these nerves are not separate and distinct.  The 30-percent evaluation shall be assigned under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8521 since it represents the predominant disability.
  
References:  For more information on
separate evaluations and pyramiding, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b, and
nerve branches of the lower extremities, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2.e.

V.iii.12.A.2.g.  Determining Individual Nerves Affected in the Upper and Lower Extremities When Evaluating Disabilities

When evaluating peripheral nerve disabilities of the upper and lower extremities, the rating activity must conduct a thorough review of the medical evidence of record to determine the individual nerve(s) affected. 
 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) examiners are required, to the extent possible, to select the individual nerves affected when completing DBQs.  However, the examiner may not necessarily conduct a review of all previous clinical records or perform comprehensive tests to pinpoint the exact nerve and/or symptoms attributable to that nerve. 
 
Important:  
It is the responsibility of the rating activity, in accordance with 38 CFR 4.2, to interpret the DBQ along with the whole recorded history, and accurately identify and assess the current level of peripheral nerve disability.  This includes identifying the appropriate nerve from a review of the evidence so that the appropriate evaluation can be assigned. 
Include the following language in all peripheral nerves examination requests: 
Examiner:  Please identify the specific nerve(s) affected.  If you are unable to identify the specific nerve(s), please provide a rationale in the Remarks section.  Thank you.
 
Follow the guidance in the table below when reviewing medical evidence pertaining to peripheral nerve disabilities of the upper and lower extremities.
 
If the DBQ or equivalent indicates …
And …
Then evaluate …
the specific nerve(s) affected
there is no conflicting information
the specific nerve under the appropriate DC.

there is conflicting information on what nerve is affected, but the nerves identified are within the same nerve branch
the nerve that is most beneficial to the Veteran as long as the DC supports the symptoms.

the identified nerves are in different nerve branches; however, the symptoms identified in the medical evidence are not clearly associated with an individual nerve
all symptoms shown in the medical evidence for the individual nerve(s) in the associated nerve branches.
the examiner is unable to specify the affected nerve(s)
there is no other evidence adequately documenting the affected nerve
upper extremity symptoms using 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8514 (the radial nerve), or
lower extremity symptoms using 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8521 (the common peroneal nerve). 
Exception:  Where the disability at issue is lower extremity radiculopathy associated with service-connected (SC) thoracolumbar disability, follow the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.B.3.d and evaluate using 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8520 (the sciatic nerve).
 
Note:  The nerve branches and general functions of the nerve branches of the lower extremities are described in the table found in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2.e.

V.iii.12.A.2.h.   EMG and Other Tests for Peripheral Nerve Conditions

Electromyography (EMG) results are required for evaluations of peripheral nerve disabilities unless there is a previous EMG test of record or the record contains sufficient clinical evidence to determine the extent of paralysis in the peripheral nerve.
 
As noted in the Peripheral Nerves Conditions (Not Including Diabetic Sensory - Motor Peripheral Neuropathy) Disability Benefits Questionnaire, EMG studies are usually rarely required to diagnose specific peripheral nerve conditions in the appropriate clinical setting and, if EMG studies are in the medical record and reflect the Veteran's current condition, repeat studies are not indicated. 
 
Important:  Ultimately, it is the role of the rating activity to determine if the examination was sufficient to confirm the question and extent of peripheral nerve involvement.
 
Note:  Other clinical findings that may be sufficient to document a peripheral nerve disability include
sensation to light touch testing
deep tendon reflex testing
certain signs for the median nerve
trophic changes
gait testing
muscle strength testing, and
the presence of muscle atrophy. 

V.iii.12.A.2.i.   Applying the Amputation Rule to Peripheral Nerve Disabilities

In determining whether the amputation rule under 38 CFR 4.68 applies to peripheral nerve evaluations, decision makers must consider the etiology of the peripheral nerve disability.
 
If the peripheral nerve disability is associated with a musculoskeletal injury or amputation, follow the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.E.2.j regarding the application of the amputation rule.
 
When peripheral nerve disabilities are not associated with a musculoskeletal injury, such as diabetic neuropathy, the amputation rule does not apply.
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating peripheral nerve injuries associated with a muscle injury, see 38 CFR 4.55.

V.iii.12.A.2.j.  Evaluating Restless Legs Syndrome

Restless legs syndrome is a neurological disorder characterized by throbbing, pulling, creeping, or other unpleasant sensations in the legs and an uncontrollable, and sometimes overwhelming, urge to move them.  Symptoms occur primarily at night when a person is relaxing or at rest and can increase in severity during the night.
 
Restless legs syndrome should be rated under the appropriate peripheral neuropathy code(s) that most closely approximates the area of the extremity or extremities affected by the distribution of the symptoms.

 
3.  Migraine Headaches

Introduction

This topic contains information on migraine headaches, including
evaluation criteria for migraine headaches
DC 8100 terminology: prostrating and completely prostrating
role of medical evidence in establishing the fact of prostration
lay evidence of prostration from migraine headaches
DC 8100 terminology: 
severe economic inadaptability, and
less frequent and very frequent
frequency determinations: types of proof, and
headache journals.

Change Date

September 14, 2023

V.iii.12.A.3.a.  Evaluation Criteria for Migraine Headaches

Migraine headaches are evaluated under the criteria of 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100.  Evaluations depend primarily on the frequency of attacks and the degree to which symptoms are prostrating.  The extent to which the headaches cause work impairment is also a factor and is considered for the 50-percent evaluation.
Important:  The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, in Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet.App. 67 (2020), held that the criteria of 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100, contemplate more than merely headache symptoms, and that the DC requires VA to 
consider all symptoms experienced as a result of migraine attacks, and 
evaluate those symptoms based on the overall frequency, severity, and economic impact of the migraine attacks.
Example:  A Veteran suffers SC migraine headaches that occur twice weekly and are prostrating in nature.  Symptoms manifested during the migraine headache attacks include frontal headaches, photophobia, nausea, and dizziness.  In evaluating the disability under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100, VA must consider all symptoms associated with the migraine headache attacks, and not just the headaches themselves.

V.iii.12.A.3.b.   DC 8100 Terminology:  Prostrating and Completely Prostrating

Prostrating, as used in 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100, means “causing extreme exhaustion, powerlessness, debilitation or incapacitation with substantial inability to engage in ordinary activities.” 
 
Completely prostrating, as used in 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100, means extreme exhaustion or powerlessness with essentially total inability to engage in ordinary activities.  

V.iii.12.A.3.c.  The Role of Medical Evidence in Establishing the Fact of Prostration

Although prostration is substantially defined by how the disabled individual subjectively feels and functions when having migraine headache symptoms, medical evidence is required to establish that the reported symptoms are due to the SC migraine headaches. 
 
The following is an example of a medical statement that would ordinarily establish the fact of prostration if the medical report and the history provided by the claimant are both credible.
 
The patient reports symptoms of severe head pain, blurred vision, nausea and vomiting, and being unable to tolerate light or noise, worsened by most activities including reading, writing, and engaging in conversations or physical activities.  When experiencing these symptoms, the patient only sleeps or rests.  The symptoms reported by the patient are consistent with the diagnosis of migraine headaches and the reported limitations are consistent with those seen in patients suffering from migraine headaches of similar clinical severity.  
 
Note:  Medical reports may not use the word “prostration.”  However, this is an adjudicative determination based on the extent to which the facts meet the definition of the term. 

V.iii.12.A.3.d.  Lay Evidence of Prostration from Migraine Headaches

A claimant’s own testimony regarding symptoms and limitations when having those symptoms can establish prostration as long as the testimony is credible and symptoms are otherwise competently attributed to migraine headaches through medical evidence. 
 
Example:  A claimant provides testimony that she 1) experiences severe headaches and vomiting when exposed to light; 2) does not engage in any activities when this occurs; and 3) must rest or sleep during these episodes.  If there is medical evidence that the claimant’s description of symptoms is in fact symptoms of migraine headaches, a determination that the headaches cause prostration can be made.
 
Reference:  For more information on competency of lay testimony, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.B, and
Espiritu v. Derwinski, 2 Vet.App. 492 (1992).

V.iii.12.A.3.e.  DC 8100 Terminology: Severe Economic Inadaptability

Severe economic inadaptability denotes a degree of substantial work impairment.  It does not mean the individual is incapable of any substantially gainful employment.  Evidence of work impairment includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the use of sick leave or unpaid absence.
 
Note:  In cases where migraine headaches meet the criterion of severe economic inadaptability and, additionally, the evidence shows that the claimant is incapable of substantially gainful employment due to the headaches, referral for consideration of an extraschedular award of a total evaluation based on individual unemployability is appropriate.
 
Reference:  For more information on severe economic inadaptability, see Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet.App 440 (2004).

V.iii.12.A.3.f.  DC 8100 Terminology: Less Frequent and Very Frequent

38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100 does not define the terms less frequent for the 0- percent criterion or very frequent for the 50-percent criterion.  However, the overall rating criteria structure for migraine headaches provides a basis for guidance.
 
As noted in 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100, the 10-percent evaluation specifies average frequency (“averaging one in 2 months over the last several months”), which is half of what is required for a 30-percent evaluation (“on average once a month over the last several months”). 
 
For definitions of the terms less frequent and very frequent, refer to the table below.
 
Term
Evaluation Level
Definition
less frequent
0 percent
Characteristic prostrating attacks, on average, are more than two months apart over the last several months.
very frequent
50 percent
Characteristic prostrating attacks, on average, are less than one month apart over the last several months.


V.iii.12.A.3.g.  Frequency Determinations:  Types of Proof

Frequency of migraine headache attacks or episodes is a factual determination.  Analyze all evidence in the record bearing on the question.
 
Probative evidence may include
medical progress notes
competent and credible lay evidence on how often the claimant experiences symptoms (as long as those symptoms have been competently identified as symptoms of migraine headaches)
contemporaneous notes (a headache journal)
prescription refills, and
witness statements.
Note:  The absence of treatment reports is not necessarily probative on the question of headache frequency as a claimant may not seek treatment for headaches during every episode.
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating evidence, including competency and credibility, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.

V.iii.12.A.3.h.  Headache Journals

Headache journals, which routinely and relatively contemporaneously record headache episodes, may be accepted as credible lay testimony regarding
headache frequency
prostration, and
occupational impairment (for example, sick leave due to headaches).
Note:  Headaches recorded on non-work days may be used to prove frequency and prostration.  However, they will not generally be relevant to work availability, and performance or limitations, which are considerations in determining severe economic inadaptability.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section B - Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)
Article ID: 554400000180832
Updated Dec 29, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview
  

In This Section

 This section contains the following topics:
 
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Information About TBI
2
Rating Considerations for TBI
3
Secondary Conditions Associated With TBI Under 38 CFR 3.310(d)
  

 
1.   General Information About TBI
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information about TBI, including
definition of TBI
TBI events
external force for the purpose of TBI events
registry for verifying blast injuries
TBI residuals
determining the issues in TBI cases
training and signature requirements for TBI decisions, and
TBI special issue.

Change Date

August 11, 2025

V.iii.12.B.1.a.  Definition: TBI

The term traumatic brain injury (TBI) means the physical, cognitive, and/or behavioral/emotional residual disability resulting from an event of external force causing an injury to the brain. 

V.iii.12.B.1.b.    TBI Events

The TBI event is a traumatically induced structural injury and/or physiological disruption of brain function resulting from an external force indicated by at least oneof the following clinical signs immediately following the event:
any period of loss of consciousness or decreased consciousness
any loss of memory for events immediately before or after the injury
any alteration in mental state at the time of the injury (confusion, disorientation, slowed thinking, etc.)
neurological deficits, whether or not transient, or
intracranial lesion.
Notes:
The TBI event has two necessary components: the external force and the identifiable acute manifestations of brain injury immediately following the external force.  Not all individuals exposed to an external force will have brain injury, and therefore, they will not meet the criteria for having a TBI event. 
The acute manifestations may resolve without chronic disability, or a chronic disability may result.
Although unconsciousness or reduced consciousness is common in TBI events, these are not required.  Any one of the five signs will be sufficient. 

V.iii.12.B.1.c.  External Force for the Purpose of TBI Events

External force means any of the following events:
a foreign body (such as a bullet or shell fragment) penetrating the brain
the head being struck by an object (such as a fist, a hatch, or flying debris)
the head striking an object (such as the ground or a windshield)
the brain undergoing an acceleration/deceleration movement without direct external trauma to the head
force generated from events such as a blast or explosion, to include low-level blasts or explosions from firing heavy weapons systems or explosives, such as
artillery weapons, or
shoulder-launched missiles, or
other force yet to be defined.
Note:  TBI events may occur during combat or non-combat situations (such as a motor vehicle accident, fall, or personal assault).

V.iii.12.B.1.d.  Registry for Verifying Blast Injuries

The U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command Joint Trauma Analysis and Prevention of Injury in Combat (JTAPIC) has developed a registry of service members who were within 50 feet of a blast since mid-2010. 
 
When existing Department of War records, to include service treatment records (STRs), are not sufficient to verify exposure to a blast injury that occurred since mid-2010, Compensation Service will contact JTAPIC to determine if there is a record of exposure. 
 
Important:  E-mail Compensation Service at VAVBAWAS/CO/214DADVISORYANDSRT if exposure to an in-service blast injury from mid-2010 to the present cannot be verified.  Include the following information in the e-mail:
full name of Veteran
claim number and Social Security number
branch of service
brief description of the blast injury
location
date of blast/injury, and
unit.

V.iii.12.B.1.e.    TBI Residuals

The resultant disabling effects of a TBI event beyond those that follow immediately from the acute injury to the brain are known as TBI residuals or TBI sequelae. 
 
The signs and symptoms of TBI residuals can be organized into the three main categories of physical, cognitive, and behavioral/emotional residuals for evaluation purposes.  Examples of TBI residuals in each of the three categories may include, but are not limited to, those listed below.
 
Physical
Cognitive
Behavioral/Emotional
Apraxia (inability to execute purposeful, previously learned motor tasks, despite physical ability and willingness)
Dementias (pre-senile Alzheimer's type, dementia pugilistica, post traumatic dementia)
Depression
Aphasia (difficulty communicating orally and/or in writing)
Attention and concentration deficits
Agitation and irritability
Paresis (muscle weakness or incomplete paralysis)
Memory, processing, and learning impairment
Impulsivity
Plegia (paralysis or stroke)
Language deficiencies
Aggression
Dysphagia (difficulty swallowing)
Planning difficulties
Anxiety
Disorders of balance and coordination
Judgment and control difficulties
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Diseases of hormone deficiency
Reasoning and abstract thinking limitations

Parkinsonism
Self-awareness limitations

Nausea/vomiting


Headaches


Dizziness


Blurred vision


Seizure disorder


Sensory loss


Weakness


Sleep disturbance


 
Note:  TBI residuals can resolve in a short period of time or can persist chronically or even permanently. Chronic TBI residuals may include some or all of the clinical signs that developed immediately during the TBI event. Others (such as seizures or spasticity) may have a delayed onset.

V.iii.12.B.1.f.  Determining the Issues in TBI Cases

A claim for service connection (SC) for TBI may also be worded as a claim for “head injury” or “concussion.”  A claim document mentioning any of the above must be sympathetically read and understood as a claim for all identifiable TBI residuals that can be attributed to one or more TBI events.
 
A claim for “combat injuries,” assault, automobile accident, fall, or other injurious events may also raise the issue of a TBI if there was an injury to the head. 
 
As recognized by 38 CFR 4.124a, diagnostic code (DC) 8045, the external force of a claimed TBI event may result not only in brain injury but also in physical or psychological disorders distinct from brain injury residuals.  An explosion, for example, may cause burns, muscle injuries, orthopedic injuries including amputations, and PTSD in addition to a brain injury.  A TBI claim mentioning a specific traumatic event must be sympathetically read as a claim for SC for alldisabling chronic residuals of the event.
 
Reference:  For more information on determining the issues, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.

V.iii.12.B.1.g.  Training and Signature Requirements for TBI Decisions

All decisions that address TBI as an issue, including rating decisions, Statements of the Case, and Supplemental Statements of the Case, must only be worked/reviewed by a Rating Veterans Service Representative or Decision Review Officer who has completed the required TBI training.
 
Decisions for TBI require two signatures until a decision maker has demonstrated an accuracy rate of 90 percent or greater based on a review of at least 10 TBI cases. 
 
References:  For more information on 
two-signature requirements in TBI rating decisions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.d, and
training requirements for TBI determinations, see M21-3, Part I, A.3.l.

V.iii.12.B.1.h.   TBI Special Issue

Ensure that the Traumatic Brain Injury special issue indicator has been added in all cases involving claims for TBI by reviewing the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) profile screen. 
 
Reference:  For more information on special issue indicators, see 
M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.F.2.f and g, and
M21-4, Appendix E, 2.

 
2.  Rating Considerations for TBI
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about rating considerations for TBI, including
SC of TBI residuals
evaluation of TBI residuals
multiple evaluations and pyramiding in TBI cases
evaluating TBI and comorbid symptoms/conditions
example of evaluating TBI with comorbid conditions
opinion evidence and separate evaluations of TBI and a mental disorder
additional TBI signs or symptoms upon reevaluation
TBI and special monthly compensation (SMC)
temporary total evaluations and TBI
applicability of 38 CFR 3.114(a) in TBI cases, and
anoxic brain injury.

Change Date

August 11, 2025

V.iii.12.B.2.a.     SC of TBI Residuals

Brain injuries, even if mild, cause permanent changes within the brain.  Even if residual impairment is not detected upon examination, the brain has been damaged in some way that is permanent in nature.  When there is a current formal diagnosis of TBI and a positive nexus linking the diagnosis to the in-service injury, 38 CFR 3.303 allows for SC on a direct basis, even when the current examination indicates the TBI is not manifesting any current signs or symptoms or that it is resolved.
 
Notes: 
TBI residuals can manifest years after the initial injury.
A medical opinion is necessary when the medical evidence of record does not show a clear-cut etiology for a sign or symptom claimed as a delayed effect.
Example:  A Veteran files a new claim for SC of TBI in December 2019.  The Veteran's service records show a mild head injury in 2010.  On the Initial Evaluation of Residuals of Traumatic Brain Injury Disability Benefits Questionnaire, the examiner selects the TBI diagnosis and marks all facets as normal.  Post-service medical records do not show any complaints of disabling signs or symptoms.
 
Result:  Grant SC for TBI under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045, 0 percent.

V.iii.12.B.2.b.   Evaluation of TBI Residuals

Evaluate service-connected (SC) TBI residuals under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045.  
 
In every case, one evaluation should be assigned using the highest level of impairment assigned to any facet contained in the table “Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified,” which has been incorporated into VBMS – Rating (VBMS-R).
 
Additional evaluations may be appropriate to assign as provided in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.2.c and d.
 
Note:  A medical classification of severity of the TBI at the time of the acute traumafrom the TBI event has no bearing on evaluation for Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation purposes.  It is not an evaluation factor and is not relevant to the application of the benefit of the doubt rule.  Do not imply or state that initial severity classification was given weight in assigning a disability evaluation.
 
References:  For more information on
evaluating secondary TBI-related conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.3, and
principles of evaluating evidence and decision making, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.

V.iii.12.B.2.c.Multiple Evaluations and Pyramiding in TBI Cases

In addition to the evaluation for TBI manifestations under the table “Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified” in 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045 (and also incorporated into VBMS-R), manifestations of a comorbid mental, neurologic, or other physical disorder can be separately evaluated under another DC if there is a distinct diagnosis – even if based on subjective symptoms – and no more than one evaluation is based on the same manifestation(s).  
 
Follow the policy in the table below.
 
If manifestations ...
Then ...
are clearly separable
assign a separate evaluation using each applicable DC.
of two or more conditions cannot be clearly separated
assign a single evaluation under whichever set of criteria allows the better assessment of the overall impaired functioning due to both conditions.
 
References:  For more information on
evaluating TBI and comorbid symptoms, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.2.d
the importance of examiner qualifications for initial TBI examinations, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 3.A.1.j
SC for vertigo, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.1.e, and
pyramiding, see
38 CFR 4.14
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b, and
Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 259 (1994). 

V.iii.12.B.2.d.  Evaluating TBI and Comorbid Symptoms/ Conditions

Use the table below when evaluating TBI and comorbid symptoms and/or conditions. 
If the Veteran has ...
Then evaluate ...
headaches
headaches according to the table below.
 
If the Veteran has …
Then …
subjective complaints of headaches
evaluate the subjective complaints as part of the TBI evaluation under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045 rather than under a separate DC. 
 
Note:  Occasional subjective headaches are not a distinct comorbid diagnosis.
a distinct comorbid diagnosis of a headache disorder
 
Examples:  Migraine headaches, post-concussive headaches, tension headaches
assign a separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8100 as long as the manifestations do not overlap with those used to assign the evaluation of TBI under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045.
   
tinnitus
tinnitus based on one of the following methods, depending on which method results in a higher evaluation: 
separately under 38 CFR 4.87, DC 6260, or
in the subjective symptoms facet under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045. 
vertigo (whether referred to as “vertigo,” “constant vertigo,” “peripheral vestibular disorder,” “benign paroxysmal positional vertigo,” or any other similar wording)
vertigo in the subjective symptoms facet under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045. 
 
Note:  If vertigo was awarded a separate compensable evaluation prior to March 15, 2012, do not change or correct the evaluation.
 
Reference:  For more information on SC for vertigo, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.1.e.
cognitive and/or behavioral/emotional residuals
 
the symptoms according to the table below.
 
If …
Then …
the Veteran has subjective feelings of anxiety, depression, or other mental complaints
evaluate in the subjective symptoms facet under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045. 
 
Note:  Subjective mental complaints are not a distinct comorbid diagnosis.
the Veteran has a comorbid mental disorder and/or neurocognitive disorder, and
the examiner is able to delineate both
symptoms, and
occupational and social impairment
assign separate evaluations for 
the mental disorder symptoms and/or neurocognitive disorder symptoms under the appropriate 38 CFR 4.130 DC, and
the TBI symptoms under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045.
the Veteran has a comorbid mental disorder or neurocognitive disorder, and
the examiner is unable to delineate both
symptoms, and
occupational and social impairment
assign a single evaluation under the DC (either under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045 or the appropriate 38 CFR 4.130 DC) that provides the higher evaluation based on overall impaired functioning due to both conditions. 
 
Note:  This guidance applies to all cognitive and behavioral/emotional TBI residuals as defined in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.1.e.  If separate and distinct physical symptoms due to TBI are present, evaluate them in the subjective or other applicable facet under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045, as long as the physical symptoms are not the basis of an evaluation under another DC.
   


V.iii.12.B.2.e.  Example of Evaluating TBI With Comorbid Conditions 

Situation:  VA examination shows the Veteran 
has numerous behavioral/emotional symptoms (depression that severely affects the Veteran's work and family relationships, frequent suicidal thoughts, confusion, apathy, and unpredictability), and 
meets the diagnostic criteria for both TBI and major depression.  
The examiner was unable to delineate which behavioral/emotional symptoms are associated with TBI and which are associated with major depression.  Evaluation under 38 CFR 4.130 criteria would result in the higher evaluation for the behavioral/emotional symptoms due to TBI and major depression.
In addition, the TBI examination found multiple physical complaints related to TBI, including vertigo, sensitivity to light, blurred vision, and subjective headaches. 
Result:  
Assign an evaluation for the behavioral/emotional residuals due to TBI and major depression under 38 CFR 4.130, DC 9434, as this provides the highest evaluation based on the behavioral/emotional symptoms.
Assign a separate evaluation under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045 for the remaining physical symptoms and combine the evaluations under 38 CFR 4.25.
Explanation:  Separate evaluations are warranted in this case because the physical symptoms of TBI are clearly separable from the behavioral/emotional symptoms.  The physical symptoms
clearly represent different functional impairment than the behavioral/emotional symptoms, and 
are not compensated under the mental disorders criteria.

V.iii.12.B.2.f.  Opinion Evidence and Separate Evaluations of TBI and a Mental Disorder

Ensure that sufficiently clear and unequivocal medical opinion evidence exists in the claims folder whenever there is a question of whether TBI and a mental disorder are distinct and can be separately evaluated.  Veterans Benefits Administration decision makers are not qualified to make such determinations. 
 
The opinion may be provided by either an examiner assessing the TBI or an examiner assessing the mental disorder as long as the individual offering the opinion is properly qualified. 
 
If a medical provider cannot make the required determination without resorting to mere speculation, then careful consideration must be given to whether that statement can be accepted under Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet.App. 382 (2010).

V.iii.12.B.2.g.  Additional TBI Signs or Symptoms Upon Reevaluation

When considering a claim for reevaluation of TBI, do not automatically concede that a new sign, symptom, or diagnosis is a residual of TBI simply because it is listed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.1.e or in the evaluation criteria. 
 
If there is not competent evidence that the sign, symptom, or diagnosis is associated with the SC TBI, obtain medical clarification. 

V.iii.12.B.2.h.   TBI and SMC

Brain injuries may be associated with loss of use of an extremity, sensory impairments, erectile dysfunction, need for regular aid and attendance (A&A) (including need for protection from hazards of the daily living environment due to cognitive impairment), and being factually housebound or statutorily housebound. 
 
Carefully consider eligibility for special monthly compensation (SMC) when evaluating TBI residuals. 
 
References:  For more information on
SMC, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A
the special SMC rate for TBI, specified in 38 U.S.C. 1114(t), see 
38 CFR 3.350(j), and
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.11, and 
ordering examinations and other development for SMC (t), see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A.11.b.

V.iii.12.B.2.i.  Temporary Total Evaluations and TBI

In cases of recently discharged Veterans, consider the applicability of a temporary 50-percent or 100-percent prestabilization evaluation under the provisions of 38 CFR 4.28.
 
Lengthy VA hospitalizations or surgeries with convalescence may also implicate consideration of eligibility for temporary total evaluation under 38 CFR 4.29 and 38 CFR 4.30.  

V.iii.12.B.2.j.  Applicability of 38 CFR 3.114(a) in TBI Cases

The rating criteria for evaluating TBI were changed effective October 23, 2008.
 
Under Note (5) of 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045, a Veteran whose residuals of TBI are rated under a version of the diagnostic criteria in effect before October 23, 2008, may request review under the current regulation irrespective of whether the disability has worsened since the last review.  A request for review pursuant to this note will be treated as a claim for an increased rating for purposes of determining the effective date of an increased rating awarded as a result of such review, applying 38 CFR 3.114(a) as applicable.  However, in no case will the award be effective before October 23, 2008.
 
Reference:  For more information on liberalizing changes of law and VA issues, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.

V.iii.12.B.2.k.  Anoxic Brain Injury

Anoxic brain injury is a condition resulting from a severe decrease in the oxygen supply to the brain that may be due to any of a number of possible etiologies, including trauma, strangulation, carbon monoxide poisoning, stroke, and many others.
 
As anoxic brain injury does not have its own unique DC in the rating schedule, it can be rated analogously, depending on the specific medical findings in a particular case. 
 
Use the table below to determine the possible analogous rating.
 
If the residuals are similar to ...
Then evaluate the symptoms analogous to ...
TBI
38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045.
brain hemorrhage
38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8009.
psychiatric disability
38 CFR 4.130, DC 9310.
nerve damage
one or more DCs for specific nerves that are affected.
 
Important:  Follow the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.2.c and dwhen considering the assignment of multiple evaluations for residuals.

 
3.  Secondary Conditions Associated With TBI Under 38 CFR 3.310(d)
 

Introduction

This topic contains information on secondary conditions associated with SC TBI, including
secondary SC under 38 CFR 3.310
evaluating the initial severity of TBI
using the TBI initial severity table in 38 CFR 3.310
evidence that may be relevant to the initial severity factors
determination of diagnosable conditions as secondary to TBI
considerations when establishing secondary SC
action when evidence shows a 38 CFR 3.310(d) condition, and
determining effective dates for secondary conditions.

Change Date

August 11, 2025

V.iii.12.B.3.a.  Secondary SC Under 38 CFR 3.310

38 CFR 3.310(d) was amended on December 17, 2013, to establish an association between TBI and certain illnesses. 
In absence of clear evidence to the contrary, the following five diagnosable illnesses are held to be a secondary result of TBI:
Parkinsonism, including Parkinson’s disease, following moderate or severe TBI
unprovoked seizures, following moderate or severe TBI
dementias (presenile dementia of the Alzheimer’s type, frontotemporal dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies), if the condition manifests within 15 years following moderate or severe TBI
depression, if the condition manifests within three years of moderate or severe TBI or within 12 months of mild TBI, or
diseases of hormone deficiency that result from hypothalamo-pituitary changes, if the condition manifests within 12 months of moderate or severe TBI.
Entitlement to secondary SC for these TBI-related conditions under 38 CFR 3.310(d) depends upon the initial severity of the TBI and the period of time between the injury and onset of the secondary illness.
 
Important:  There is no need to obtain a medical opinion to determine whether the above conditions are associated with TBI when there is a TBI of a qualifying degree of severity.
Notes: 
Determine the initial severity level of the TBI based on the TBI symptoms at the time of the original injury, or shortly thereafter, rather than the current level of functioning. 
Regional offices (ROs) must continue to follow guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.2 when evaluating residuals of TBI.  However, ROs must follow guidance in this topic when establishing secondary SC for claimants who have experienced a TBI in service and later develop one of the five diagnosable conditions listed in 38 CFR 3.310(d).
The determination of initial severity is adjudicative – although based on medical evidence.  That means the rating activity must decide the facts, such as initial severity, that correspond with the legal standard set forth in the regulation.
References:  For more information on
using the TBI initial severity table in 38 CFR 3.310(d) and how to proceed if the level of severity cannot be determined based on the available evidence, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.3.c, and
evaluating evidence and making findings of fact to support conclusions of law, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 1.A.

V.iii.12.B.3.b.  Evaluating the Initial Severity of TBI

For purposes of determining the initial severity of the TBI, consider the factors from the table in 38 CFR 3.310(d).  Review medical records and lay statements for evidence of 
structural imaging of the brain, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or positron emission tomography (PET) scans
loss of consciousness (LOC)
alteration of consciousness/mental state (AOC), including disorientation
post-traumatic amnesia (PTA), including any loss of memory, and
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), which provides a measurement of the degree of coma at or after 24 hours.
Reference:  For more information on verifying in-service blast injuries, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.1.d.

V.iii.12.B.3.c.  Using the TBI Initial Severity Table in 38 CFR 3.310

The TBI does not need to meet all the criteria listed under a certain initial severity level in order to classify the TBI under that severity level. 
If the Veteran’s TBI meets the criteria in more than one severity level, classify the initial severity at the highest level in which a criterion is met.
Because “normal structural imaging,” “abnormal structural imaging,” and “AOC greater than 24 hours” may be found at more than one severity level, classify severity based on other criteria in the table.  If no other criteria are present, then determine the level of severity as follows:
If AOC is greater than 24 hours and no other criteria are present, determine the severity as moderate.
If structural imaging is noted as normal and no other criteria are present, determine the severity as mild.
If structural imaging is noted as abnormal and no other criteria are present, determine the severity as moderate.
If the level of severity cannot be determined based on the available evidence, then apply the provisions of 38 CFR 3.310 (a) and (b) and order a VA examination/medical opinion as necessary.

V.iii.12.B.3.d.Evidence That May BeRelevant tothe InitialSeverity Factors

Evidence that may be relevant in ascertaining the initial severity of TBI symptoms includes
lay statements provided by the Veteran
lay statements from witnesses to the injury
history provided by the Veteran in medical reports, to include VA exams, and
STRs findings at any time after the TBI.
Note:  The evidence that establishes the initial severity of the TBI does not necessarily have to be contemporaneous to the injury as long as it relates to the condition of TBI at or shortly after the time of the injury. 
 
Example:  A Korean War Veteran submits a claim for SC for Parkinsonism secondary to his SC TBI.  The Veteran’s discharge examination from 1954 mentions a history of TBI in service.  However, it does not contain information sufficient to determine the level of severity of the initial TBI injury.  The Veteran provides a statement that he experienced a loss of consciousness during the Battle of Chosin Reservoir.  A review of prior VA examination reports reveals a history provided by the Veteran that he was told by fellow soldiers that he fell unconscious for almost an hour after two grenades exploded near him.
 
Analysis:  Although service records do not reveal the specific level of TBI during service, the Veteran’s statement is credible, consistent with circumstances of his service, and therefore sufficient to determine that he experienced a moderate level of TBI during service.

V.iii.12.B.3.e.  Determination of Diagnosable Conditions as Secondary to TBI

Use the table below to determine secondary SC for conditions listed in 38 CFR 3.310(d).
 
If there is a diagnosis of …
And the initial severity of the TBI was …
Then …
Parkinsonism, including Parkinson’s disease
moderate or severe
award SC.
unprovoked seizures
moderate or severe
award SC.
dementia of the following types:
presenile dementia of the Alzheimer type
frontotemporal dementia, and
dementia with Lewy bodies
moderate or severe
award SC if dementia manifested within 15 years after the TBI.
depression
moderate or severe
award SC if depression manifested within three years after the TBI.

mild
award SC if depression manifested within one year after the TBI.
a disease of hormone deficiency that results from hypothalamo-pituitary changes (any condition in the endocrine system section of the rating schedule, 38 CFR 4.119, DCs 7900-7912, or any condition evaluated analogous to one of those conditions)
moderate or severe
award SC if the condition manifested within one year after the TBI.


V.iii.12.B.3.f.  Considerations When Establishing Secondary SC

When evaluating TBI-related secondary conditions, avoid pyramiding when considering the initial TBI evaluation and symptoms that are now associated with the five secondary conditions.  Also, consider Notes (1) and (2) under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045, while ensuring that the claimant receives the highest overall evaluation under the provisions of 38 CFR 4.25 (Combined Ratings Table). 
 
Depending on the most advantageous combined evaluation, it is permissible to reduce an existing TBI evaluation as long as the overall evaluation of both TBI and the separate secondary SC condition is not reduced.  Use the combinator tool in VBMS-R to determine the combined evaluation of TBI and the secondary SC condition.  Thoroughly explain the decision in the Narrative section of the rating decision.
 
Use the table below to consider symptoms which apply to both TBI and the secondary conditions listed in 38 CFR 3.310(d).
 
If ...
Then ...
the symptoms associated with one of the five conditions were also used to provide the highest level of evaluation for any facet under 38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8045
consider removing evaluation of the facet, and
use the next highest-evaluated facet as the evaluation for the TBI residuals, as long asthe symptoms of that facet are not used to establish SC for one of the five diagnosable conditions.
the same symptoms apply to both disabilities
evaluate the evidence and determine whether the symptoms can be entirely associated with one disability versus the other disability, and 
do not request an additional medical examination for this determination.  If it is unclear, assume that the manifestations are not separable.
the same symptoms apply to both disabilities, and the symptoms are clearly associated with one disability versus the other disability
 
 
select the most advantageous option from the following:
 
Option
Actions
1
Remove symptoms from the TBI facet
evaluate the TBI under the next highest-evaluated facet that does not contain those symptoms
award secondary SC for the diagnosable condition, and
evaluate the secondary condition using those symptoms.
2
Keep the symptoms under the TBI facet, and
do not award secondary SC for the diagnosable condition, but
ensure the diagnosable condition is included with the description of the SC TBI disability in the rating decision.
3
Keep the symptoms under the TBI facet
award secondary SC for the diagnosable condition, and
evaluate based on the distinct symptoms.
   
 
Reference:  For more information on evaluating TBI residuals, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.2.b.

V.iii.12.B.3.g.Action When Evidence Shows a 38 CFR 3.310(d) Condition

Use the table below to determine how to proceed when evidence shows one of the five diagnosable conditions in 38 CFR 3.310(d). 
 
If ...
Then ...
one of the five diagnosable conditions in 38 CFR 3.310(d) is identified in the evidence of record while processing a claim unrelated to SC TBI
a claim for that secondary condition must be invited.
evidence shows one of the five diagnosable conditions while evaluating a claim related to SC TBI
develop under normal claim processing procedures and make a determination on the secondary condition under the provisions of 38 CFR 3.310(d).


V.iii.12.B.3.h.  Determining Effective Dates for Secondary Conditions

The rule authorizing VA to establish the five secondary TBI-related conditions in 38 CFR 3.310 is effective January 16, 2014. 
 
This rule will be applied to all cases pending before VA on or after January 16, 2014, and does constitute a liberalizing VA regulation under 38 U.S.C. 5110(g) and 38 CFR 3.114.  Apply these principles when determining effective dates and retroactive benefits.
 
Reference:  For more information on 38 CFR 3.114(a), see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 14 - Dental and Oral Conditions
Article ID: 554400000180509
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section   Next Section -->
Overview

In This Chapter
 
This chapter contains the following topics: 
Topic
Topic Name
1
General Principles for Rating Dental and Oral Conditions for Compensation Purposes
2
Rating Specific Dental and Oral Conditions


 
1.  General Principles for Rating Dental and Oral Conditions for Compensation Purposes
  

Introduction

This topic contains information on and general principles for rating dental and oral conditions for compensation purposes, including
interpreting claims raising dental issues
general information on service connection (SC) for dental and oral disabilities for compensation purposes
dental/oral contentions for which compensation-purpose SC may not be established
dental examinations in compensation claims for a dental disability
denying dental claims for SC compensation
schedule of ratings for dental and oral conditions, and
dental-oral rating schedule changes.

Change Date

October 10, 2019

V.iii.14.1.a.  Interpreting Claims Raising Dental Issues

Service connection (SC) for dental/oral disabilities and conditions can be established for
compensation purposes, or
treatment purposes only.
Generally assume that a claim for a dental/oral disability or condition, filed on a prescribed form, seeks SC for compensation purposes unless the claim’s wording clearly communicates pursuit of dental treatment, in which case, follow procedures found in M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.B.1.a.
 
Important:
Under 38 CFR 3.381(a), the Veterans Benefits Administration will adjudicate a claim for SC of a dental condition for treatment purposes after the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) determines a Veteran meets the basic eligibility requirements of 38 CFR 17.161.  Therefore, do not address as an actionable contention, or in the setting of a rating decision, the issue of SC for treatment purposes unless prompted to do so by a specific request from VHA.
The rating principles discussed in this section are specific to determinations of SC for compensation purposes.  Rating for dental treatment purposes, conversely, is discussed in M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.C.
References:  For more information on
processing dental treatment requests, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.B, and
clarifying claims, see M21-1, Part III, Subpart i, 2.D.1.c.

V.iii.14.1.b.  General Information on SC for Dental and Oral Disabilities for Compensation Purposes

Claims for SC of dental and oral disabilities are developed and decided pursuant to the same policies and procedures that apply to SC for compensation purposes of conditions of other body systems. 
When notifying a Veteran of a decision to grant compensation-purpose SC for a dental or oral disability, include language to the following effect in the rating decision narrative:
 
Although your dental condition or disability is service-connected, eligibility for treatment for that disability is limited by statute.  You may not be eligible for VA dental care.  
 
Please contact the VHA facility that is nearest your home for a determination on whether you are eligible for treatment for your service-connected dental condition or disability.
Reference:  For more information on interpreting claims raising dental issues and the definition of a dental disability, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 14.1.a.

V.iii.14.1.c.  Dental/Oral Contentions for Which Compensation-Purpose SC May Not Be Established

Generally, and unless otherwise contraindicated, any dental/oral condition that may be rated under, or by appropriate analogy to, the diagnostic code (DC) criteria of 38 CFR 4.150 is potentially subject to SC for compensation purposes.
 
However, the following are prohibited from being deemed service-connected (SC) for compensation purposes:
treatable carious teeth
replaceable missing teeth
dental or alveolar abscesses
periodontal disease
dental calculi
third molars
impacted or malposed teeth (and other similar developmental defects), and
teeth extracted because of chronic periodontal disease.
Note:  38 CFR 4.150, DC 9913, does permit and provide for potential compensation-purpose SC for missing teeth; however, it also requires that such tooth loss be associated with underlying bone (maxilla/mandible) loss acquired as a result of
service trauma, as discussed in M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.C.1, or
non-periodontal disease, such as osteomyelitis.
References:  For more information on conditions that may be considered SC for
treatment purposes only, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.C.1, and
neither compensation nor treatment purposes, see M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 4.C.1.

V.iii.14.1.d.Dental Examinations in Compensation Claims for a Dental Disability

Obtain a dental examination for purposes of SC or evaluation purposes when necessary. 
 
Dental examinations are considered specialist examinations. 
References:  For more information on 
when an examination is necessary under the duty to assist for a dental or other disability, see M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 1.A and B, and  
specialist examinations, see
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.1.h, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart i, 2.A.6.

V.iii.14.1.e.Denying Dental Claims for SC Compensation

Consider the issue of SC for compensation purposes for the conditions listed in 38 CFR 3.381(b) in a formal rating and deny the claim if
a Veteran claims compensation for one of these conditions, and
the record shows no complicating condition that is subject to SC. 
In the Narrative of the rating decision, discuss that under 38 CFR 3.381(b) SC for such conditions can be established only for treatment purposes, and note if dental treatment in service was limited to conditions affecting only the teeth or gums.

V.iii.14.1.f.  Schedule of Ratings for Dental and Oral Conditions

The schedule of ratings for dental and oral conditions are contained at 38 CFR 4.150.
 
Important:  When there is competent and credible medical evidence of impairment associated with conditions listed in 38 CFR 4.150 DCs that cannot be evaluated within the listed diagnostic criteria, that impairment must be evaluated separately.  Examples of potentially-associated impairments include (but are not limited to)
loss of
vocal articulation
smell, or
taste
neurological impairment
respiratory dysfunction, or
other impairments (such as scars). 
Important:  The guidance on other impairment associated with dental and oral conditions was added as Note (2) to changes to 38 CFR 4.150 effective September 10, 2017.  However, as currently provided in M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.A.2.c, when deciding expressly claimed issues, decision makers must consider entitlement to any complications that are within the scope of the claim including those identified by the rating criteria.
 
Reference:  For more information on the dental-oral rating schedule changes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 14.1.g.

V.iii.14.1.g.  Dental-Oral Rating Schedule Changes

A final rule made amendments to the rating schedule provisions for dental and oral conditions (38 CFR 4.150) effective September 10, 2017.  The changes were notconsidered liberalizing. 
Reference:  For more information on handing claims when there are regulatory changes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.

2.  Rating Specific Dental and Oral Conditions

Introduction

This topic contains information on rating specific dental and oral conditions, including
diagnostic imaging confirmation requirement for evaluations based on nonunion of the mandible or maxilla
special considerations in evaluations for temporomandibular disorder (TMD), and
definition and evaluation guidelines for bruxism.

Change Date

May 27, 2020

V.iii.14.2.a. Diagnostic Imaging Confirmation Requirement for Evaluations Based on Nonunion of the Mandible or Maxilla 

Under 38 CFR 4.150, DC 9903, nonunion of the mandible requires confirmation by diagnostic imaging studies.
 
Under 38 CFR 4.150, DC 9916, maxillary nonunion requires confirmation by diagnostic imaging studies.  
 
As defined in the note to 38 CFR 4.150, diagnostic imaging studies include but are not limited to
conventional radiography (x-ray)
computed tomography (CT)
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
positron emission tomography (PET)
radionuclide bone scanning, and
ultrasonography.
The term nonunion refers to incomplete healing after an adequate healing period with fibrous union and mobility of fracture segments. 
 
Important:  An actual copy of the imaging study does not need to be present in the claims folder.  However, the folder must reflect confirmation that the imaging was reviewed by the examiner. 
 
Note:  Although this is a new regulatory requirement, added to 38 CFR 4.150effective September 10, 2017, the September 2016 version of the Oral and Dental Conditions Including Mouth, Lips And Tongue (Other Than Temporomandibular Joint Conditions) Disability Benefits Questionnaire asks if x-rays or other studies, to include studies of the maxilla and mandible, have been conducted and instructs the examiner that if studies supporting the diagnosis are already of record they do not have to be repeated.  For cases pending on the effective date of the change of law, September 10, 2017, if there is a diagnosis of nonunion unsupported by diagnostic studies, obtain clarification.  

V.iii.14.2.b.  Special Considerations in Evaluations for TMD

Temporomandibular disorder (TMD) (which may also be called temporomandibular joint dysfunction (“TMJD” or more colloquially TMJ”)) is evaluated under 38 CFR 4.150, DC 9905.  Evaluation levels are based on
limitation of inter-incisal range of motion (with or without dietary restrictions), or
range of lateral excursion.
When assigning an evaluation there are a number of considerations.
 
For Department of Veterans Affairs purposes, normal maximum unassisted range of inter-incisal motion is 35 to 50mm. 
A 10-percent evaluation can be assigned for no more than 34 mm of inter-incisal motion. 
Under the prior version of the DC (effective prior to September 10, 2017), a 10-percent evaluation was available for motion up to 40 mm. 
For each range of maximum assisted inter-incisal motion, the appropriate evaluation to assign will depend on whether or not the condition necessitates dietary restriction to mechanically-altered foods. 
The regulation provides in Note (3) that mechanically altered foods are foods altered by blending, chopping, grinding, or mashing to make them easier to chew and swallow.  Mechanical alteration can be to one of four levels or gradations:  full liquid, puree, soft, and semi-solid. 
The note refers to dietary restrictions in which mechanically altered foods are required as texture modified diets.
Dietary restrictions involving any textured modified diet (any grade of mechanically altered food) must be recorded or verified by a physician. 
A contention or testimony by an individual that he or she is using a texture modified diet or requires one due to the SC condition is not sufficient to establish that the condition necessitates a texture modified diet with restriction to mechanically altered foods.
Endorsement of the need for the dietary restriction to mechanically altered foods by a competent medical professional is required.  An examination report may satisfactorily record or verify that the SC condition necessitates the dietary restriction to mechanically altered food. 
With respect to inter-incisal range of motion, the DC requires ranges be “unassisted.”  This means active range of motion. 
In assigning an evaluation for TMD or any other dental disability on the basis of limited motion of temporomandibular articulation under 38 CFR 4.150, DC 9905, do not assign separate evaluations for limited inter-incisal motion or painful motion involving each side of the jaw.  Doing so is pyramiding.  Only one evaluation may be assigned. 
 
If both sides of the jaw are affected, use the limitation of motion on the side that affords the highest evaluation. 
 
Example:  Maximum unassisted inter-incisal motion is limited to 34 mm on the right and 25 mm on the left.  There is no dietary restriction to mechanically altered foods.  There is credible evidence of actually painful motion of both sides of the jaw.  Assign a single 20-percent evaluation under 38 CFR 4.150, DC 9905.  Do notassign separate 10-and 20-percent evaluations.
Do not combine ratings for limited inter-incisal motion with a rating based on limitation of lateral excursion of the jaw. 
 
References:  For more information on 
entitlement to a single rating for limitation of inter-incisal motion to include as due to painful motion, see Vilfranc v. McDonald, 28 Vet.App. 357 (2017)
painful motion for joint conditions under 38 CFR 4.59, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.A.1
choice of law for cases pending at the time of a regulatory change, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6, and
the prohibition against pyramiding, see 
38 CFR 4.14, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.2.b.

V.iii.14.2.c.  Definition and Evaluation Guidelines for Bruxism

Bruxism is defined as excessive grinding of the teeth and/or excessive clenching of the jaw.  It may not be evaluated as a stand-alone SC disability.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, Chapter 1, Section B - Codesheet Section
Article ID: 554400000180524
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
System-Generated Data Table Entries and the Jurisdiction of the Codesheet
2
Additional Service Codes
3
Combat Status Codes
4
Special Provision Codes
5
Special Monthly Compensation (SMC) Codes
6
Special Notations and Notification Templates
7
Signature
8
Exhibit:  Sample Draft Codesheet for Application of the Amputation Rule


 
1.  System-Generated Data Table Entries and the Jurisdiction of the Codesheet     
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about the system-generated data table entries and the Jurisdiction of the Codesheet, including
system-generated data table entries organized by field, and
Jurisdiction of the Codesheet.

Change Date
 
June 27, 2016

V.iv.1.B.1.a.  System-Generated Data Table Entries Organized by Field
 
Use the table below to determine when entries are generated by the system in the fields of the data tables on the Codesheet based on user-entered data on the MASTER RECORD tab and/or DISABILITY DECISION INFORMATION screens.
Note:  Each page of the rating decision contains a header with information identifying the claimant and rating.
Reference:  For more information on preparing a rating decision using the Veterans Benefits Management System – Rating (VBMS-R), see the VBMS-R User Guide.
Field
When Entry Is Generated
Reference
Active duty dates, branch, and character of discharge
Entry generated for the initial rating decision.
Note:  The entries remain the same on subsequent rating decisions unless changed.
---
Additional service code
Entry generated for the initial rating decision, if applicable.
See M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.2.
Combat status code
Entry generated for the initial rating decision that addresses service connection (SC).
Note:  There is no need for a later entry unless the combat status has changed.
See M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.3.
Special provision codes
Entry generated only if applicable to current or future benefit entitlement.
See M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.4.
Future Exam date
Entry generated only if applicable to future benefit entitlement
See
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A.5.a, and
M21-1, Part IV, Subpart ii, 1.A.1.c.
Special monthly compensation (SMC) codes
Entry generated only if applicable to current or future benefit entitlement.
Note:  The SMC table is part of the Special Monthly Compensation part of the coded conclusion. The table appears only when SMC is granted at some point in time.
See M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.5.


V.iv.1.B.1.b.  Jurisdiction of the Codesheet
 
The Jurisdiction of the Codesheet
appears below the heading section
explains why the case is before the rating activity
refers to the claim at issue, and
cites the pertinent jurisdictional date.

 
2.  Additional Service Codes  

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about additional service codes, including
generating additional service codes, and
description of the codes.

Change Date
 
October 19, 2018

V.iv.1.B.2.a.  Generating Additional Service Codes
 
The additional service code is automatically generated when, for example, the decision maker selects combat related.

V.iv.1.B.2.b.  Description of the Codes
 
Use the table below for a description of additional service codes.
Code
Description
1-WT
Indicates additional service, some of which occurred during a wartime period.
2-PTE
Indicates additional service, all occurring during a peacetime period.
3-SCD
Establishes entitlement in a pension rating decision based on the existence of a service-connected (SC) disability at the time of separation for which discharge or release was or would have been granted, as provided in 38 CFR 3.3(a)(1)(ii) and 38 CFR 3.3(a)(3)(ii).
Note:  This code is used only in pension rating decisions for Veterans with less than 90 days of service.
WWI-Service in Russia
Indicates whether or not there was service in Russia that qualifies as World War I (WWI) service.
Note:  The narrative must show whether or not there was service in Russia in cases where the Veteran had no active service during the inclusive dates for WWI, April 6, 1917, to November 11,1918, but did serve thereafter, on or before April 1, 1920.


3.  Combat Status Codes
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about combat codes, including
definition of combat disability, and
description of combat status codes.

Change Date
 
December 13, 2005

V.iv.1.B.3.a.  Definition:  Combat Disability
 
The term combat disability applies to any injury incurred in action against an enemy of the United States or as a result of an act of such an enemy.  These injuries include
wounds by missiles (bullets or shrapnel)
psychological trauma or posttraumatic stress disorder experienced in accidents, explosions, or airplane crashes during a period when the Veteran was in combat, and
diseases directly attributable to exposure to the elements as a result of action against the enemy or by the enemy, such as exposure following an airplane crash or shipwreck.
Reference:  For more information on combat-related disabilities, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 2.A.3.d.

V.iv.1.B.3.b.  Description of Combat Status Codes
 
The table below contains descriptions for each of the four combat status codes.
Code
Description
1-None
Indicates no combat disabilities.
2-(Comp.)
One or more combat disabilities, all of which are compensable.
3-(Noncomp.)
One or more combat disabilities, none of which are compensable.
4-(Both)
One or more combat disabilities, not all of which are compensable.


  
4.  Special Provision Codes 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information on special provision codes, including
definition of special provision codes
data capture of special provision codes
descriptions of individual special provision codes, and
examples of special provision code 6 indicating computer audit acceptance.

Change Date
 
March 13, 2017

V.iv.1.B.4.a.  Definition:  Special Provision Codes
 
Special provision codes are used to identify those rating cases that contain an evaluation or combined degree that would not ordinarily be acceptable but for a special provision of the rating schedule or other Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regulation.

V.iv.1.B.4.b.  Data Capture of Special Provision Codes
 
VBMS-R captures the required special provision code data for Codesheet entry based on selection(s) made from the OTHER - SPECIAL PROVISION DETERMINATIONS drop-down on the ISSUE MANAGEMENT tab.
Reference:  For further information on selection of special provisions, see the VBMS-R User Guide.

V.iv.1.B.4.c.  Descriptions of Individual Special Provision Codes
 
The table below contains descriptions for each of the seven special provision codes.
  
Code
Description
1
Indicates Medal of Honor pension under 38 CFR 3.802.
2
Indicates naval pension allowance under 38 CFR 3.803.
3
Indicates extra-schedular entitlement to individual unemployability or pension under 38 CFR 3.321(b).
 
Note:  In legacy systems, any extra-schedular evaluation was identified by entry of ES following the specific diagnostic code (DC).
4
Indicates an under-schedular evaluation (by reason of deduction of the pre-service level of disability) to a pre-service disability aggravated by service.
 
Note:  In legacy systems, any under-schedular evaluation was identified by entry of US following the specific DC.
5
Indicates the Veteran is incarcerated, and pension is being awarded to dependents under 38 CFR 3.666.
6
Indicates
computer audit acceptance of any combination of the special provision codes
a total evaluation is continued because it is protected under 38 CFR 3.951, or
acceptance of a combined evaluation that is not justified by the individual evaluations.
7
Indicates receipt of compensation or Dependency Indemnity Compensation (DIC) under 38 U.S.C. 1151.


V.iv.1.B.4.d.  Examples of Special Provision Code 6 Indicating Computer Audit Acceptance
 
The following are examples of the use of special provision code 6 when a combined evaluation is not justified by the individual evaluations in cases:
when graduated evaluations are assigned for two or more diagnoses of inactive tuberculosis that may not be combined
when an independent respiratory condition is assigned in addition to a graduated evaluation for pulmonary tuberculosis that may not be combined
when the combined evaluation exceeds the maximum allowable under the amputation rule in a case, such as two or more independent disabilities affecting one extremity (Use of code 6 provides for computer audit acceptance of valid DCs at any evaluation and a combined degree of less than the normal value of the individual evaluation.)
when a 10-percent combined evaluation may be assigned under 38 CFR 3.324, such as two or more separate noncompensable disabilities, including disabilities under 38 U.S.C. 1151, and
when two or more conditions are assigned separate evaluations considered as one for the purpose of meeting the 40-percent or 60-percent single disability requirement of 38 CFR 4.16 in the rating schedule. 

 
5.  SMC Codes  

Change Date

April 3, 2015

V.iv.1.B.5.a.  SMC Codes

VBMS-R captures the required SMC coding for Codesheet entry based on data entered on the SMC CODES tab. 
Reference:  For more information on entering SMC codes, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 4.A
the VBMS-R User Guide, and
the SMC Calculator User Guide.

 
6.  Special Notations and Notification Templates
 
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information on use of the SPECIAL NOTATION field and notification template, including
purpose of special notations and notification templates
SPECIAL NOTATION field
amputation rule template
38 CFR 3.105(a) clear and unmistakable error (CUE) grant template, and
accrued grant template.

Change Date
 
October 19, 2018

V.iv.1.B.6.a.  Purpose of Special Notations and Notification Templates
 
The primary purposes of notations made in the SPECIAL NOTATION field and the notification template fields on the Codesheet are to
record special remarks or approvals applicable to the rating decision, and
communicate an instruction or administrative message to the authorization activity.
Note:  All special notations and templates are generated through input in the PROFILE tab of VBMS-R. 
Reference:  For more information on the PROFILE tab, see the VBMS-R User Guide.

V.iv.1.B.6.b.  Special Notation Field
 
Use the SPECIAL NOTATION field, accessible from VBMS-R's PROFILE tab, to communicate an instruction or administrative message to the authorization activity.  Clarify if the message is solely administrative (for example, Cancel the erroneously established EP 930) or to be shared with the Veteran (for example, Tell the Veteran that the evaluation of his nephrolithiasis is currently awaiting higher-level review and will be addressed in a future decision).
Note:  The special notation text appears at the bottom of the Codesheet above the signature(s).
Reference:  For more information on the SPECIAL NOTATION field, see the VBMS-R User Guide.

V.iv.1.B.6.c.  Amputation Rule Template
 
Use the amputation rule template, accessible from VBMS-R's PROFILE tab, to list the disabilities and evaluations included in the application of the amputation rule.
Show the actual combined evaluation of all disabilities of the affected extremity, as well as the schedular evaluation associated with amputation of the extremity at the elective level.
Note:  The amputation rule text appears at the bottom of the Codesheet above the signature(s).
References:  For more information on 
the amputation rule, see
38 CFR 4.68, and
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.F.1.e
levels of evaluation associated with amputations, see 38 CFR 4.71a, and
the amputation rule in VBMS-R, see
M21-1 Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.8, and
the VBMS-R User Guide.

V.iv.1.B.6.d.38 CFR 3.105(a) CUE Grant Template

Use the 38 CFR 3.105(a) grant template, accessible from VBMS-R's PROFILE tab, when granting benefits on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE).
Note:  The 38 CFR 3.105(a) template is comprised of both automated text and free text. It appears at the top of the first page of the Codesheet below the data tables.
References:  For more information on 
the CUE template in VBMS-R, see the VBMS-R User Guide, and
CUEs, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.

V.iv.1.B.6.e.Accrued Grant Template

When granting an accrued benefit claim, use the language generated by enabling the accrued grant template accessible from VBMS-R's PROFILE tab.
Note:  The accrued template is only available for selection if the Veteran is deceased.  When generated, the accrued grant template will appear at the top of the first page of the Codesheet below the data tables.
Reference:  For more information on the accrued grant template, see the VBMS-R User Guide.

 
7.  Signature

Introduction

This topic contains information on the signature line on rating decisions, including
definition of signatures on rating decisions 
procedure for completing a digital signature on the rating decision codesheet
single-signature rating decisions
two-signature rating decisions
obtaining additional signatures for rating decisions in VBMS-R, and
sample rating decision codesheet signature field.

Change Date

December 18, 2024

V.iv.1.B.7.a.Definition: Signatures on Rating Decisions

Rating decisions must contain the decision maker’s digital signature on the bottom of the last page of the Codesheet.
A rating decision signature is defined as
an electronic signature certification statement as shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.b, and
the user’s 
local area network identification (LAN ID), and
job title.
Important:  
If a rating decision requires more than one signature, the rating decision Codesheet must display the required additional signature fields.
The signature of the decision maker(s) certifies that the claims folder was reviewed and all phases of the claims process leading to the decision were correctly handled.
References:  For more information on
signature requirements for legacy appeal decisions, see M21-5, Chapter 7, Section D.3.c
completing the signature field on the rating decision Codesheet, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.b
two-signature rating decisions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.d
second signature procedures, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.e, and
a sample rating decision Codesheet signature field, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.f.

V.iv.1.B.7.b.Procedure for Completing a Digital Signature on the Rating Decision Codesheet

The rating decision Codesheet must contain the standardized digital signature of the decision maker as described in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.a. "Wet signatures” are no longer required.
To establish the standardized digital signature, users should navigate to the SIGNATURES/DOCUMENT TITLE tab in VBMS-R’s options configurations, and populate the AUTHOR SIGNATURE LINE field as follows:
eSign: certified by [decision maker’s LAN ID, job title] 
Example:  eSign: certified by VSCJSMIT, RVSR
 
References:  For more information on
updating the SIGNATURES/DOCUMENT TITLE tab in VBMS-R, see the Draft Rating Approval (DRA) Job Aid, and
a sample rating decision Codesheet signature field, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.f.

V.iv.1.B.7.c.Single-Signature Rating Decisions

Single-signature authority is restricted to decision makers whose ability to produce quality work independently without additional oversight has been demonstrated by review.
Note:  Authority for single signature may
vary among different regional offices (ROs) and decision makers depending on local circumstances, and
be granted for specific types of rating decisions as the decision maker demonstrates the requisite skill and understanding needed to ensure quality.

V.iv.1.B.7.d. Two-Signature Rating Decisions

All rating decisions require the signatures of two decision makers, unless approved as single-signature ratings by the Veterans Service Center Manager (VSCM) or Pension Maintenance Center Manager (PMCM).
Exception:  The VSCM/PMCM does not have authority to grant single-signature authority in all cases.  The table below lists specific types of rating issues that always require a second signature.
  
If deciding …
And the decision maker is a(n) …
Then the rating decision requires …
SMC at a rate greater than SMC (l)
traumatic brain injuries, pending satisfaction of the criteria described in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.B.1.o
former prisoners of war (FPOW) issues, and 
proposals to sever SC 
Rating Veterans Service Representative (RVSR) or Decision Review Officer (DRO)
second-signature approval of a designated reviewer.
Exception:  Pension or DIC FPOW ratings, whether completed by a Pension Management Center employee or via automated claims processing, do not require second-signature approval.
any issue involving a disability related to military sexual trauma, pending satisfaction of the criteria described in M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 1.E.1.g
locally designated, specialized RVSR or DRO
second-signature approval of a designated reviewer.
extra-schedular pension under 38 CFR 3.321(b)(2)
RVSR or DRO
approval by VSCM or PMCM.
CUE under 38 CFR 3.105(a)
 
Exception:  CUE rating decisions prepared as the result of a Board of Veterans’ Appeals or Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims decision do not require additional approval.
RVSR
approval by VSCM or PMCM or designated reviewer.

DRO
approval by VSCM or PMCM or designated reviewer only if the issue is
severance of SC, or
a reduction in evaluation of an SC disability(ies).
certain extensions of temporary total evaluations under
38 CFR 4.29, or
38 CFR 4.30
RVSR or DRO
approval by the VSCM.
 
Reference:  For more information on VSCM approval of temporary total evaluations, see M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 8.B and C.
Reference:  For more information on signatures in CUE cases, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A.3.

V.iv.1.B.7.e.Obtaining Additional Signatures for Rating Decisions in VBMS-R

Submit all draft rating decisions requiring additional signatures via the DRA functionality within VBMS-R.
Important:  A rating decision should not be finalized until all necessary second and third signatures have been obtained.
Reference:  For more information on submitting a draft rating decision for additional signatures, see the DRA Job Aid.

V.iv.1.B.7.f.  Sample Rating Decision Codesheet Signature Field 

A sample rating decision Codesheet with the signature field containing the electronic signature certification statement and the user’s LAN ID is shown below.
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III.iv.6.D.7.f.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 

8.  Exhibit : Sample Draft Codesheet for Application of the Amputation Rule
 

Change Date

June 27, 2016

V.iv.1.B.8.a.Sample Draft Codesheet, Amputation Rule

The exhibit below contains a sample draft Codesheet demonstrating proper application of the amputation rule under 38 CFR 4.68.
 INCLUDEPICTURE "/Users/zachbeaudoin/Library/Group Containers/UBF8T346G9.ms/WebArchiveCopyPasteTempFiles/com.microsoft.Word/III_iv_6_D_9_a_draft_codesheet.png" \* MERGEFORMATINET 

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, Chapter 1, Section C - Coded Conclusion
Article ID: 554400000180525
Updated Dec 29, 2025

<-- Previous Section Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1 
General Information on the Coded Conclusion
2 
Diagnostic Codes (DCs)
3 
Evaluations and Effective Dates
4 
Combined Evaluations
5
Benefit Withholdings
6
Other Coding Issues
7
Listing Compensation Rating Codes
8
Listing Pension Rating Codes
9
Coding Denials of Non-Service-Connected (NSC) Conditions


 
1.  General Information on the Coded Conclusion
 

Introduction

This topic contains general information on the coded conclusion, including
definition of coded conclusion
coding subsequent ratings, and
decisions not requiring a coded conclusion.

Change Date

November 7, 2019

V.iv.1.C.1.a.  Definition:  Coded Conclusion

A coded conclusion is the section of the Codesheet of a rating decision which contains
a summary of information on the status of benefits, and
all decided issues.
Reference:  For more information on generating a coded conclusion in Veterans Benefits Management System - Rating (VBMS-R), see the VBMS-R User Guide.

V.iv.1.C.1.b.  Coding Subsequent Ratings

Subsequent ratings automatically bring forward the coding for all disabilities previously rated whenever coding directly affecting compensation or pension entitlement is added or changed.
Reference:  For more information on backfilling historical rating data, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.3.e.

V.iv.1.C.1.c.  Decisions Not Requiring a Coded Conclusion

No coded conclusion is required when only issues such as the following are involved:
denial of special monthly compensation, or
a finding that a supplemental claim is not supported by new and/or relevant evidence.
There are no codes applicable to the disposition of these issues.

 
2.  DCs
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about DCs, including
components of an analogous code
using hyphenated codes to rate residual conditions, and
rating multiple disabling manifestations from the same disease.

Change Date

May 29, 2025

V.iv.1.C.2.a. Components of an Analogous Code

An analogous code consists of two diagnostic codes (DCs) separated by a hyphen.  The first DC of an analogous code is a four-digit code as follows:
the first two digits refer to the body system involved in the rating, and
the second two digits are always 99.
The second DC of an analogous code is composed of a four-digit code that
is taken from the rating schedule, and
identifies the criteria used to evaluate the claimed disability.
Example:  Use 6599-6516 for postoperative tonsillectomy if the condition is evaluated under the criteria for chronic laryngitis.
 
Note:  A DC may not end in 99 unless it is the first four-digit code in an analogous code. 
  
References:  For more information on 
analogous ratings, see
38 CFR 4.20
M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.1.c and d
Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet.App. 345 (1992), and
Webb v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 1377 (Fed.Cir. 2023), and
listing pension rating codes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.8.

V.iv.1.C.2.b.  Using Hyphenated Codes to Rate Residual Conditions

Hyphenated codes do not necessarily denote analogous ratings.  A hyphenated DC may be used to identify the proper evaluation of a disability or a residual from disease.
The first DC of a hyphenated code identifies the diagnosed disease or condition.  The second DC of a hyphenated code identifies the criteria in the rating schedule used to evaluate the disability.
Example:  Ankylosis of the wrist from rheumatoid arthritis would be rated under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5002-5214.

V.iv.1.C.2.c.  Rating Multiple Disabling Manifestations From the Same Disease

When rating multiple disabling manifestations resulting from the same disease, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson’s disease, parkinsonism, or cerebrovascular accident, code each disability separately as follows:
show the DC of the disease only once by listing it as the lead DC of a hyphenated code
follow the lead code and hyphen with a code for the body system that results in the highest evaluation percentage
code the involvement of the other manifestations thereafter under the DC for the disability on which the evaluation is based, and
show the remaining disabilities as secondary to the primary disease entity.
Example:  Multiple disabling manifestations of Parkinson’s disease (38 CFR 4.124a, DC 8004) would result in the following hyphenated and non-hyphenated DCs:
8004-8520 Parkinson’s disease with right lower extremity tremors, muscle rigidity, stiffness, and bradykinesia (sciatic nerve) [the most severely affected residual, followed by the less disabling residuals]
8520 left lower extremity tremors, muscle rigidity, stiffness, and bradykinesia (sciatic nerve) due to Parkinson’s disease
8515 right upper extremity tremors, (median nerve) due to Parkinson’s disease
9434 major depressive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, and
7204 difficulty swallowing due to Parkinson’s disease.
Exceptions:
Evaluate diabetes mellitus and resulting complications based on M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 11.1 and 38 CFR 4.119.
Evaluate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by following the guidance in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.C.2.d and e.
References:  For more information on
rating multiple disabling manifestations from the same disease, see the VBMS-R User Guide
evaluating peripheral nerve conditions, see  M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.A.2
evaluating arthritis, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 1.C
evaluating residuals of MS, see  M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.C.1
evaluating Parkinson’s disease and parkinsonism, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 12.C.3.d, and
suggested DCs for manifestations of systemic disease, see Suggested Diagnostic Codes for Parkinson's disease, Multiple Sclerosis (MS), and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) in the list of tools on the Job Aids Home Page.

 
3.  Evaluations and Effective Dates
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about evaluations and effective dates, including
required evaluations and effective dates for service-connected (SC) disabilities
evaluations and effective dates for NSC disabilities
recording evaluations
showing evaluations in ratings that apply 38 CFR 3.105(e), and
backfilling historical rating data.

Change Date

April 18, 2023

V.iv.1.C.3.a.  Required Evaluations and Effective Dates for SC Disabilities

The coded conclusion on the Codesheet must contain the following information for all service-connected (SC) disabilities, both individually and as combined totals:
current percentage evaluation
current effective date
future percentage evaluation, if applicable, and
future effective date, if applicable.
Note:  An effective date of pension entitlement is required only next to rating code 2.
Reference:  For more information on backfilling historical rating data, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.3.e.

V.iv.1.C.3.b.  Evaluations and Effective Dates for NSC Disabilities

Effective dates are not required for non-service-connected (NSC) disabilities.
Use the table below to determine when evaluations for NSC disabilities are required.
If rating a claim for ...
Then evaluations for NSC disabilities ...
compensation only
are not required.
Exception:  If the claimant is currently in receipt of pension, but claiming – and being disallowed – entitlement to compensation, then evaluations for NSC disabilities are required.
pension only
are required except as described in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.8.a.
compensation and pension
are required.


V.iv.1.C.3.c.  Recording Evaluations

For each SC disability, record
the evaluation in effect
the new evaluation assigned, if indicated, and
future evaluation(s), if indicated.
Note:  Show only one line of entitlement after the SC condition whenever there is a retroactive increase or reduction.
Example:  A Veteran has been entitled to 30 percent from January 1, 1993, and 50 percent from January 1, 1994.  A retroactive increase of 70 percent from January 1, 1994, has been awarded.  The coded conclusion should only show the 30-percent evaluation from January 1, 1993, and the 70-percent evaluation from January 1, 1994.

V.iv.1.C.3.d.  Showing Evaluations in Ratings That Apply 38 CFR 3.105(e)

When applying the provisions of 38 CFR 3.105(e) in a final compensation reduction rating, the coded conclusion should show the
current evaluation in effect, and
future reduced evaluation.

V.iv.1.C.3.e.  Backfilling Historical Rating Data 

Backfilling refers to the process of entering, by way of VBMS-R’s MASTER RECORD tab, prior rating decision data that does not currently appear on the Codesheet or in the corporate database.
 
When rendering any non-original decision, carefully review the coded conclusion in concert with those of prior determinations and backfill all historical disability decision information in the master record, as necessary.

 
4.  Combined Evaluations
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about combined evaluations, including
combined evaluations contained on the coded conclusion
applying the bilateral factor, and
rounding combined evaluations.

Change Date

April 18, 2023

V.iv.1.C.4.a. Combined Evaluations Contained on the Coded Conclusion

The coded conclusion contains the
current combined evaluation
historical combined evaluation(s), and
the effective date(s) for each combined evaluation.
The COMBINED EVALUATION FOR COMPENSATION field is populated whenever there is at least one SC or 38 U.S.C. 1151-awarded disability.
The COMBINED EVALUATION FOR PENSION field is populated with the combined evaluations of both the NSC and SC disabilities whenever a claim for pension has been decided.
Exception:  Proposed evaluations, such as under the Integrated Disability Evaluation System program or proposed reductions, are not reflected in the combined evaluation.
Note:  VBMS-R automatically calculates each combined evaluation effective date based on the issues established and effective dates entered.

V.iv.1.C.4.b. Applying the Bilateral Factor

38 CFR 4.26 provides for a bilateral factor whenever there are compensable disabilities affecting the use of
both arms
both legs, or
paired skeletal muscles.
The ratings for the disabilities of the right and left sides will be combined as usual, and 10 percent of this value will be added (i.e., not combined) before proceeding with further combinations of non-bilateral disabilities or converting to degree of disability.  This is known as the bilateral factor.
 
Important: 
The bilateral factor only applies when there are qualifying disabilities of the left and right sides.
When a specific DC provides one evaluation for a bilateral condition, only apply the bilateral factor if there is/are 
 
an independently ratable condition in one of the involved extremities, such as in the case of a 20-percent evaluation for left leg muscle damage under 38 CFR 4.73, DC 5311, in addition to a 30-percent evaluation for bilateral pes planus under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276, or
independently ratable conditions of both uninvolved extremities, such as in the case of two separate 20-percent evaluations for right and left shoulder osteoarthritis under 38 CFR 4.71a, DCs 5201, in addition to a 30-percent evaluation for bilateral pes planus under 38 CFR 4.71a, DC 5276.
Exception:  Effective April 16, 2023, 38 CFR 4.26 was amended to address instances where certain  disabilities including the bilateral factor do not combine to the most favorable percentage.  In such cases, the regulation allows one or more bilateral disabilities to be removed from the bilateral factor calculation and combined separately to achieve the higher evaluation.  The bilateral factor will still be applied to the bilateral disability or disabilities that are not excluded from the calculation.  VBMS-R will automatically make the calculations and assign the higher evaluation when possible. 
 
Note:  The 38 CFR 4.26 change effective April 16, 2023, is considered a liberalizing Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) issue within the meaning of 38 U.S.C. 5110(g) and 38 CFR 3.114. 
References:  For more information on 
not applying the bilateral factor when doing so would have a negative effect on the rating, see 38 CFR 4.26(d)
when the bilateral factor may not be applied to skin conditions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, 10.1.h, and
liberalizing changes, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.6.

V.iv.1.C.4.c.  Rounding Combined Evaluations

Rounding combined evaluations is the last step in determining the combined degree of disability under 38 CFR 4.25, and is to be done only once per rating.
Use the table below to determine how to round actual combined evaluations.
If an actual combined evaluation ends in a ...
Then round ...
fraction from 0.1 to 0.4
down to the nearest whole degree.
fraction from 0.5 to 0.9
up to the nearest whole degree.
whole number from 1 to 4
down to the nearest number divisible by 10.
whole number from 5 to 9
up to the nearest number divisible by 10.


 
  
5.  Benefit Withholdings 
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about coding and Codesheet entries needed to identify benefits subject to withholding, including 
general information on VBMS-R’s withholding functionality
identifying disabilities for which combat-related disability severance pay was awarded
identifying periods of service for which separation benefits were awarded, and
examples of separation benefit Codesheet annotations. 

Change Date

 August 23, 2018

V.iv.1.C.5.a.  General Information on VBMS-R’s Withholding Functionality

VBMS-R includes functionality that facilitates offsets to VA benefit awards when beneficiaries have received certain concurrent payments 
of disability severance pay
under the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act (RECA)
in connection with tort awards, or
of Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) benefits.
When review of the evidentiary record reveals that a beneficiary received one of the above-referenced payment types for an SC disability, use the WITHHOLDING INFORMATION field in VBMS-R’s DISABILITY DECISION INFORMATION (DDI) screens to identify the 
type of concurrent payment for which VA benefit withholding is necessary and,
if applicable, the percentage of VA benefit withholding needed.
Exception:  Do not enter the withholding information attributes described in this block if a Veteran received disability severance pay for one or more SC disabilities incurred in a combat zone or during the performance of duty in combat-related operations, as discussed in M21-1, Part VI, Subpart ii, 2.3.e and f.  Instead, identify such disability(ies) by following the procedures in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.5.b.
 
References:  For more information on
concurrent benefits and elections, see 38 CFR 3.700
prohibition against duplication of benefits in claims involving
disability severance pay, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart ii, 2
RECA, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart ii, 1.B.4, and
tort awards, see
M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iv, 6.C, and
M21-1, Part XII, Subpart i, 3.F, and
OWCP benefits, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart ii, 5.

V.iv.1.C.5.b. Identifying Disabilities for Which Combat-Related Disability Severance Pay Was Awarded 

When awarding service connection (SC) for disabilities that were incurred in a combat zone, or during the performance of duty in combat-related operations, and resulted in an award of disability severance pay, as discussed in M21-1, Part VI, Subpart ii, 2.3.e and f, identify each such disability by selecting Enhanced Disability Severance Pay from the SPECIAL ISSUE INFORMATION drop-down menu in VBMS-R. 

V.iv.1.C.5.c. Identifying Periods of Service for Which Separation Benefits Were Awarded

As is discussed in M21-1, Part VI, Subpart ii, 2.2.k, identification of the period(s) of service during which SC disabilities had their onset can often materially influence award actions to recoup separation benefits (other than disability severance pay) awarded by the Department of War at the time of discharge. 
Compensation payable for SC disabilities incurred during any period of service that preceded the discharge for which separation benefits were paid is subject to recoupment. 
Compensation payable for SC disabilities incurred during a period of service that followed the discharge for which separation benefits were paid is not subject to recoupment.
When awarding SC to a Veteran who received a separation benefit other thandisability severance pay, follow the steps in the table below to properly identify the periods of service during which all SC disabilities were incurred, as necessary.
Step
Action
1
Has the Veteran performed multiple periods of service? 
If yes, go to the next step.
If no, disregard the remaining steps in this table.  No form of annotation or service-period differentiation is required, as all payable compensation is subject to the recoupment of separation benefits.
2
Did the Veteran incur one or more SC disabilities during a period of service that followed the discharge for which separation benefits were paid? 
If yes, go to the next step.
If no,
use the SPECIAL NOTATION field on VBMS-R’s PROFILE screen to include a Codesheet annotation that reads, All SC disabilities subject to recoupment, and
disregard the remaining steps in this table.
3
Use the SPECIAL NOTATION field on VBMS-R’s PROFILE screen to include a Codesheet annotation that identifies 
each SC disability, and
the period of service during which it was incurred.
Notes: 
Examples of the above-referenced Codesheet annotations are shown in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.5.d.
If all SC disabilities were incurred during one single period of service, a summary annotation to that effect (e.g. All SC disabilities incurred during period of service spanning 06/11/2007-08/25/2011) is sufficient.
Exception:  If the authorization activity is able to confirm that separation benefits have already been recouped in full, inclusion of the annotations and service-period differentiation discussed in this block is not required.
 
References:  For more information on
determining whether a Veteran received separation benefits, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart ii, 2.1.b, and
special notations and notification templates, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.6.

V.iv.1.C.5.d. Examples:  Separation Benefit Codesheet Annotations 

Scenario 1:  A Veteran served from February 13, 1985, to September 26, 1991, and October 28, 1992, to December 4, 1996, and received separation benefits at the end of the first period of service.  SC is established for right shoulder impingement syndrome, left hip bursitis, bronchial asthma, gastric ulcer, and bilateral testicular atrophy.  Analysis of service treatment records (STRs) shows that the shoulder, hip, and gastric ulcer were incurred during the first period of service.  The testicular atrophy and asthma had their onset during the second period of service.
 
Outcome:  A sufficient Codesheet annotation is shown below.
 
     -Right shoulder impingement syndrome, left hip bursitis, and gastric ulcer      were incurred during period of service spanning 02/13/85-09/26/91.
     -Testicular atrophy and bronchial asthma were incurred during period of      service spanning 10/28/92 - 12/04/96.
 
Scenario 2:  A Veteran served from March 18, 2001, to November 9, 2009, and May 30, 2011, to April 18, 2016, and received separation benefits at the end of the second period of service.  SC is established for status-post total abdominal hysterectomy, scarring alopecia, and bilateral plantar fasciitis.  Analysis of STRs shows that the hysterectomy was performed during the first period of service, while the alopecia and plantar fasciitis manifested during the second.
 
Outcome:  A sufficient Codesheet annotation is shown below.
 
     -All SC disabilities subject to recoupment.
 
Scenario 3:  A Veteran served from September 22, 2003, to December 15, 2007; from April 17, 2009, to September 18, 2014; and from January 7, 2016, to May 2, 2018, and received separation benefits at the end of the second period of service.  SC is established for migraine headaches, thoracolumbar strain, and temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMD).  Analysis of STRs shows that the thoracolumbar strain and TMD were incurred during the first period of service, while the migraine headaches manifested during the third.
 
Outcome:  A sufficient Codesheet annotation is shown below.
 
     -Back strain and TMD were incurred during the period of service      spanning 9/22/03 - 12/15/07.
     -Headaches were incurred during the period of service spanning 1/7/16 –      5/2/18.

  
6.  Other Coding Issues
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about other coding issues, including
denying 
individual unemployability (IU), and
special monthly pension (SMP)
coding competency, and
removing active duty discontinuance coding.

Change Date

August 23, 2018

V.iv.1.C.6.a.  Denying IU

When the issue of entitlement to individual unemployability (IU) is denied for the first time, a formal, coded rating is required.

V.iv.1.C.6.b.  Denying SMP

A summary of past coding pertaining to compensation or pension entitlement is not required when there is no entitlement to special monthly pension (SMP) unless the decision has changed.
Include the denial of SMP in any future ratings that bring forward compensation or pension coding.

V.iv.1.C.6.c.  Coding Competency

The coded conclusion should show all determinations of incompetency and restored competency.  Include competency determinations in any future ratings that bring forward compensation or pension coding.
If a previously incompetent Veteran has regained competency
prepare a rating to show
that the Veteran is competent, and
the effective date of the determination, and
furnish a copy of the rating to the fiduciary activity.
Important:  Do not furnish a copy of the rating to the fiduciary activity in the case of a VA institutionalized Veteran without a spouse, child, or fiduciary if VA Form 21-592, Request for Appointment of a Fiduciary, Custodian or Guardian, was not furnished earlier under the provisions of M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.F.
Reference:  For more information on the process for making competency determinations, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.A.3.

V.iv.1.C.6.d. Removing Active Duty Discontinuance Coding 

As is discussed in M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 2.B.1.c, preparation of a rating decision that reflects loss of entitlement to benefits based on a Veteran’s return to active duty is not necessary. 
 
Similarly, as discussed in M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 2.B.1.g, rating action to reinstate benefits following a Veteran’s release from active duty is not necessary unless the Veteran’s award was originally discontinued by rating decision.
 
When deciding the claim of a Veteran whose prior Codesheet(s) reflect the loss of SC during a period of active duty, use the MASTER RECORD tab and/or DDI screens to remove all previous Active Duty – Discontinue selections and corresponding discontinuance dates from all affected SC disabilities.  The authorization activity will recreate all necessary adjustments by award action.
Reference:  For more information on rating decisions that show loss of entitlement during periods of active duty, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 2.B.1.h.

 
7.  Listing Compensation Rating Codes
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about listing compensation rating codes, including
grouping SC disabilities
using diagnostic terminology, and
coding 
compensation awards, and
new awards of previously considered issues.

Change Date

August 23, 2018

V.iv.1.C.7.a.  Grouping SC Disabilities

Group all disabilities subject to compensation under code 1, showing the
disabilities by current evaluation in descending order, and
DC followed by the diagnosis.
Note:  In VBMS-R, disabilities are grouped automatically and carried forward from rating to rating.

V.iv.1.C.7.b.  Using Diagnostic Terminology

Use the diagnostic terminology provided by the medical examiner (or other alternative medical evidence) in the rating decision.
Notes: 
Do not attempt to translate the examiner’s terms into schedular terminology unless citation is required by way of explanation, such as when rating by analogy.
Do not cite a lengthy diagnosis in full.  Instead, retain its essential elements in the decision.
Do not cite residuals of diseases or therapeutic procedures without reference to the underlying disease.
Do not include unnecessary descriptive words in the diagnosis.  For example, state the diagnosis as hypertension, and not severe hypertension.
Do not follow the diagnosis with parenthetical annotations that include the terminology used by the claimant to describe the condition on the application (e.g. tinnitus (claimed as ringing in the ears)) on the Codesheet.  Instead, as instructed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A.3.d, limit use of such annotations to the rating decision Narrative alone.

V.iv.1.C.7.c.  Coding Compensation Awards

When first establishing SC for a particular disability, include the following under each diagnosis:
percentage evaluation
effective date
period of service, and
appropriate basis for each award
INCURRED
AGGRAVATED
PRESUMPTIVE
SECONDARY
38 CFR 3.383 (PAIRED EXTREMITY), or
AGGRAVATED NSC.
Note:  Some decision basis selections will require additional information.  For example, if the selected decision basis is SECONDARY, an associated disability must be selected from the ASSOCIATED DISABILITY drop-down menu.
Reference:  For more information on coding compensation awards, see the VBMS-R User Guide.

V.iv.1.C.7.d.  Coding New Awards of Previously Considered Issues

Use the table below when awarding SC for an issue that was previously 
denied SC, or
rated in order to support entitlement to another non-compensation benefit, such as
pension
vocational rehabilitation, or
SC for treatment purposes under 38 U.S.C. 1702.
If the newly awarded disability was previously ...
Then add the issue to the Service Connectedsection of the Codesheet, and ...
denied SC
remove its associated entry from the Not Service Connected/Not Subject to Compensation section of the Codesheet.
rated in order to support entitlement to another non-compensation benefit
remove its associated entry from the other respective section of the Codesheet, or
if possible, edit the existing Codesheetentry to include a closure date that is equivalent to the effective date of the new award of SC.
Reference:  For more information on editing and deleting existing disability decisions, see the VBMS-R User Guide.

 
8.  Listing Pension Rating Codes
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about pension rating codes, including
when coding and evaluation for NSC disabilities is not required for pension awards, and
handling disabilities that result from willful misconduct.

Change Date

April 18, 2023

V.iv.1.C.8.a.  When Coding and Evaluation for NSC Disabilities Is Not Required for Pension Awards

Code all claimed and noted disabilities, and show the evaluation of each disability, as appropriate, unless
the disabilities have been held to be due to the claimant’s own willful misconduct by rating or by an administrative decision as described in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.8.b, or
a rating determination for permanent and total disability is not required under M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 2.A.1.a-c and aid and attendance can be granted per M21-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 2.C.1.c.

V.iv.1.C.8.b.  Handling Disabilities That Result From Willful Misconduct

When intoxication from alcohol or drugs results proximately and immediately in disability or death, it is due to willful misconduct.  However, organic diseases which are caused by the chronic use of alcohol are not considered of willful misconduct origin under 38 CFR 3.301(c)(2), and should be provided an evaluation if pension is claimed.
 
Example:  Cirrhosis of the liver due to chronic alcohol abuse may form the basis for an award of NSC pension. 
 
Note:  Disabilities that result from the use of alcohol or drugs may not be SC because they cannot be deemed to have been incurred in the line of duty.
 
Reference:  For more information on willful misconduct, line-of-duty determinations, and the prohibition of payment of compensation for disability resulting from use of alcohol and drugs, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart iv, 1.C.

 
9.  Coding Denials of NSC Conditions
 

Introduction

This topic contains information about coding denials of NSC conditions, including
showing reasons for denial of NSC conditions, and
reflecting the date of original denial.

Change Date

December 16, 2016

V.iv.1.C.9.a.  Showing Reasons for Denial of NSC Conditions

When a claim is initially disposed of, the reasons for denial are shown after the diagnosis on the rating Codesheet.  For example
not incurred/caused by service
constitutional/developmental abnormality
willful misconduct, injury, or
not in line of duty.
These denial reasons will remain on the Codesheet for subsequent ratings unless
a new reason for denial is required, or
SC is awarded.
Note:  VBMS-R automatically performs these functions if all the issues are correctly entered into the program.

V.iv.1.C.9.b.  Reflecting the Date of Original Denial 

If a disability was previously denied SC, VBMS-R will reflect the date of the prior decision in the ORIGINAL DATE OF DENIAL field in all subsequent rating decisions.  This date is listed in the coded conclusion after the diagnosis on the rating Codesheet.
 
Note:  This date is not populated on the Codesheet if the current decision is the initial denial.
 
When deciding a claim for a previously denied disability, decision makers must ensure the correct date of the initial denial of the claim is reflected in the ORIGINAL DATE OF DENIAL field.  Follow the steps in the table below to update the ORIGINAL DATE OF DENIAL field in VBMS-R.
  
Step
Action
1
Navigate to the MASTER RECORD tab.
2
On the DISABILITY DECISIONS tab, locate the relevant disability, and
select VIEW/EDIT.
3
Navigate to the DIAGNOSIS INFORMATION tab, and
select EDIT.
4
Locate the ORIGINAL DATE OF DENIAL field
enter the appropriate date, and
select SAVE CHANGES.
Reference:  For more information on backfilling the master record, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.C.3.e.
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, Chapter 1, Section D - Finalizing the Rating Decision
Article ID: 554400000180526
Updated May 28, 2025

<-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section
 
This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Uploading and Distributing the Rating Decision
2
Preparing Rating Decisions for Other Entities


1.  Uploading and Distributing the Rating Decision
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about printing/uploading and distributing the rating decision, including
retaining evidence
uploading the rating decision
prohibition against altering signed rating decisions, and
distributing the Narrative section of the rating decision.

Change Date

January 7, 2025

V.iv.1.D.1.a.  Retaining Evidence
 
Retain all evidence pertinent to the rating decision in the claims folder.
Reference:  For information on non-retention of records referring to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), alcohol or drug abuse, or sickle cell anemia, see M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.B.3.

V.iv.1.D.1.b.  Uploading the Rating Decision
 
The rating decision will automatically upload to the electronic claims folder (eFolder) upon finalization of the decision.

V.iv.1.D.1.c.  Prohibition Against Altering Signed Rating Decisions
 
Do not alter any rating decision that has been signed and submitted for promulgation.  When a rating decision requires correction prior to promulgation, follow the procedures outlined in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.E.3.

V.iv.1.D.1.d.  Distributing the Narrative Section of the Rating Decision
 
The claimant will receive the Narrative section of the rating decision with notification of the decision.
 
Important: 
The Codesheet of the rating decision is intended for internal processing and should not be routinely distributed to the claimant.
Copies of draft decisions should not be released to the claimant, as discussed in M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.B.1.p.
References:  For more information on 
completing the rating decision narrative, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.A, and
decision notices, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.B.

 
2.  Preparing Rating Decisions for Other Entities
 

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about preparing rating decisions for other entities, including
making copies of rating decisions
copies for powers of attorney (POAs), and
preparing rating decisions for other entities.

Change Date

January 7, 2025

V.iv.1.D.2.a.  Making Copies of Rating Decisions
 
Whenever additional copies of the rating decision are required make appropriate entries in the COPY TO field of the Codesheet, to ensure notification of the rating decision is provided to the required entities.
Note:  Follow the guidance in the blocks below to provide copies of rating decisions in the appropriate format to applicable entities.

V.iv.1.D.2.b.  Copies for POAs 

Unless a power of attorney (POA) has opted into electronic notification, provide the POA with a copy of the rating decision as an enclosure to the decision notice.
References:  For more information on 
providing notice of correspondence to POAs, see M21-1, Part I, Subpart i, 2.B.1.c and d, and
electronic notification, see the POA Electronic Notification Fact Sheet.

V.iv.1.D.2.c.  Preparing Rating Decisions for Other Entities
 
Use the table below to find relevant references for preparing rating decisions for other entities.
If ...
Then follow the relevant procedures in ...
rating action is specifically requested by the Department of Veterans Affairs Insurance Center in Philadelphia
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.G.1.g for insurance purposes.
the Veteran is an active recipient of benefits under Chapter 31, and
the rating decision effectuates one of the following outcomes:
implements a final determination of service connection (SC) when only a memorandum rating decision for vocational rehabilitation purposes is otherwise of record
awards entitlement to individual unemployability benefits
reduces the evaluation of a service-connected disability, or
severs SC
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 5.B.3.g to ensure Veteran Readiness and Employment Service is provided notice of a rating decision.
the Veterans Health Administration requests a determination of SC for treatment purposes
M21-1, Part XIII, Subpart i, 3.A.4.c to take the appropriate rating action.
preparing a rating decision that affects a beneficiary’s competency status
M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 6.

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, Chapter 1, Section E - Reviewing the Rating Decision
Article ID: 554400000180527
Updated Jun 09, 2025

 <-- Previous Section  Next Section -->
Overview

In This Section

This section contains the following topics:
Topic
Topic Name
1
Rating Decision Review
2
Handling Dissent and Differences of Opinion in Rating Decisions 
3
Correcting Deficiencies in Rating Decisions


 
1.  Rating Decision Review
  

Change Date
 
July 22, 2024

V.iv.1.E.1.a.  Review of Rating Decisions
 
When the rating decision is completed, it may be reviewed prior to promulgation by individuals including 
a designated second signer, including the Veterans Service Center Manager or Pension Management Center Manager
a supervisor
local quality review team members, and/or
the authorization activity.
Individuals who may review promulgated and issued rating decisions include
the Compensation Service staff, to include Quality Assurance
a decision maker in connection with a legacy appeal or request for decision review under 38 CFR 3.2500, and/or
Veterans Service Center (VSC) and pension management center (PMC) management and/or quality review personnel.
 References:  For more information on
correction of errors found in rating decisions, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.E.3
processing rating decisions, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 1.A.2
quality reviews, see M21-4, Chapter 3, and
the legacy appellate process, see M21-5, Chapter 7.

 
 
2.  Handling Dissent and Differences of Opinion in Rating Decisions
  

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about handling dissenting opinions on two-signature ratings, including
dissenting opinion versus difference of opinion, and
who is responsible for resolving dissenting opinions.

Change Date
 
July 22, 2024

V.iv.1.E.2.a.  Dissenting Opinion vs. Difference of Opinion 
 
 
 For the purpose of this section:
a dissenting opinion scenario occurs when multiple decision makers whose signatures are required on a rating decision do not concur on some aspect of an unpromulgated decision, and
a difference of opinion scenario occurs when a decision maker is of the opinion that revision or amendment is needed (for reasons that do not qualify as clear and unmistakable error (CUE)) of a promulgated rating decision completed by another decision maker. 
Reference:  For more information on handling differences of opinion , see M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.A.1 and 4.

V.iv.1.E.2.b.  Who Is Responsible for Resolving Dissenting Opinions
 
 
A designated reviewer will resolve case of a dissenting opinion by providing the required second signature in place of one of the decision makers.
Reference:  For more information on second signature procedures, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7.

 
 
3.  Correcting Deficiencies in Rating Decisions
  

Introduction
 
This topic contains information about correcting deficiencies in rating decisions whether found prior to promulgation or after promulgation and issuance, including
correcting 
narrative deficiencies before or after authorization, and
the Codesheet before or after authorization
procedure for correction of rating decisions, and
revising erroneous anatomical qualifiers. 

Change Date
 
June 9, 2025

V.iv.1.E.3.a.  Correcting Narrative Deficiencies Before or After Authorization
 
The rating activity must correct all Narrative section deficiencies when those are noted prior to promulgation and/or authorization. 
The rating activity must also correct the Narrative section of a rating decision if after the claimant has been notified of the decision it is discovered that the decision provided
inaccurate information regarding factors such as service dates or entitlements, and/or
incomplete information regarding factors such as criteria for the next higher evaluation, or a change of law applicable to the pending claim. 
References:  For more information on
the procedure applicable when errors must be corrected before or after issuance of a rating, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.E.3.c
revising erroneous anatomical qualifiers, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.E.3.d, and
effect of statutory or regulatory changes, or new court precedents, while a claim is pending, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 4.A.

V.iv.1.E.3.b.  Correcting the Codesheet Before or After Authorization
 
It is critical to correct errors on the Codesheet, whether identified before or after promulgation or authorization, that
affect payment or eligibility to a benefit, or
could affect payment in the future. 
Such errors include, but are not limited to
determinations on entitlement (service connection (SC), special monthly compensation (SMC), etc.)
disability evaluations
effective dates
combined evaluations
diagnostic codes (DCs)
SMC codes, and
bilateral factors.
Important:  In addition to the above, as provided in M21-1, Part II, Subpart iii, 3.B.3.a, periods of active military service must be updated and verified in the system prior to rating.  Such errors may not affect payment, but if the Codesheetdoes not reflect the correct service dates, return the rating decision for correction.  

V.iv.1.E.3.c.  Procedure for Correction of Rating Decisions
 
Use the table below when correcting a rating decision for the reasons discussed in M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.E.3.a or b.
If the rating decision has ...
Then refer the rating decision to ...
not been issued
the decision maker who made the decision, or 
to VSC or PMC management for assignment of the rating correction.
Notes:  
If the erroneous rating decision has not been promulgated, pulling the record back into the Veterans Benefits Management System - Rating (VBMS-R) anew will overwrite the former, errant decision. 
If the underlying end product is improperly cleared before the non-promulgated rating decision can be corrected, follow the guidance in M21-1, Part II, Subpart ii, 2.A.2.b, to request VBMS document deletion of the erroneous rating decision.
been issued
VSC or PMC management for assignment to a decision maker to issue a new decision.
Note:  VSC or PMC management may assign rating corrections to another decision maker if the decision’s original author is not available.
Important: 
When a correction of an entitlement outcome is required for an issued decision that is binding, there must be
CUE under the provisions of 38 CFR 3.105(a) and M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A, or
approval of difference of opinion under 38 CFR 3.105(b) and M21-1, Part X, Subpart v, 1.A.1 and 4.
Due process procedures under 38 CFR 3.103 may apply where correction of an error in a rating decision would constitute an adverse action.
References:  For more information on 
obtaining rating decision signatures via Draft Rating Approval (DRA) functionality, see
M21-1, Part V, Subpart iv, 1.B.7, and
the DRA Job Aid
updating the master record and DC in VBMS-R, see the VBMS Rating User Guide
impact of a change in DC, see M21-1, Part V, Subpart ii, 3.D.1.d
adverse action resulting from a CUE, see M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5, and
correcting erroneous payment of benefits to a beneficiary, see M21-1, Part VI, Subpart i, 2.B.

V.iv.1.E.3.d.Revising Erroneous Anatomical Qualifiers 
 
Revise an erroneous qualifying description of one part of the body for another that has been previously compensated.  This situation is usually the result of an unwarranted substitution of left for right, or right for left.
Exception:  If an original award of SC contains an erroneous qualifying description of one part of the body for another, revise the rating decision under the CUE provisions of 38 CFR 3.105(a) and M21-1, Part X, Subpart ii, 5.A.
 
Example:  An original award of SC of gunshot wound to the left thigh, when the records clearly showed the wound was to the right thigh, is a CUE subject to correction under 38 CFR 3.105(a). 
Notes: 
A notice of proposed adverse action is not required simply due to a change in anatomical site, unless it results in a reduction in compensation.
This change will not violate the protection of SC under 38 CFR 3.957, or protection of a service-connected evaluation under 38 CFR 3.951.
A CUE decision, under 38 CFR 3.105(a), is for application when previous determinations are binding.
 Reference:  For more information on revisions to anatomical qualifiers, see
Read v. Shinseki, 651 F. 3d 1296 (2011), and
Gifford v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 269 (1994).
